nohup: ignorando entrada
2025-10-28 16:45:26,590 - INFO - Processing folder: PRJEB44302
2025-10-28 16:45:26,590 - INFO - Processing folder: PRJNA723681
2025-10-28 16:45:26,590 - INFO - Processing folder: PRJEB40481
2025-10-28 16:45:26,590 - INFO - Processing folder: PRJNA787323
2025-10-28 16:45:26,591 - INFO - Processing folder: PRJEB41560
2025-10-28 16:45:26,591 - INFO - Found 9 files to process
2025-10-28 16:45:26,698 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/show "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 16:45:26,700 - INFO - Model llama3.3:70b is available locally.
2025-10-28 16:45:26,700 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJEB44302/10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf

2025-10-28 16:45:26,706 - INFO - detected formats: [<InputFormat.PDF: 'pdf'>]
2025-10-28 16:45:26,720 - INFO - Going to convert document batch...
2025-10-28 16:45:26,720 - INFO - Initializing pipeline for StandardPdfPipeline with options hash 5f7f6517f72f4ee63b4977e857fdeb61
2025-10-28 16:45:26,724 - INFO - Loading plugin 'docling_defaults'
2025-10-28 16:45:26,725 - INFO - Registered picture descriptions: ['vlm', 'api']
2025-10-28 16:45:26,730 - INFO - Loading plugin 'docling_defaults'
2025-10-28 16:45:26,731 - INFO - Registered ocr engines: ['easyocr', 'ocrmac', 'rapidocr', 'tesserocr', 'tesseract']
2025-10-28 16:45:26,789 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:45:28,562 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:45:29,436 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:45:30,138 - INFO - Processing document 10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf
2025-10-28 16:45:38,235 - INFO - Finished converting document 10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf in 11.53 sec.
2025-10-28 16:45:38,268 - WARNING - Parameter `strict_text` has been deprecated and will be ignored.
2025-10-28 16:45:38,278 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:45:38,279 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:45:38,283 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf
2025-10-28 16:45:38,283 - INFO - Characters: 75568
2025-10-28 16:45:38,284 - INFO - Words (approx): 11548
2025-10-28 16:45:38,285 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 15012.4
2025-10-28 16:45:38,285 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 16:45:38,285 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 16:45:38,285 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        <!-- image -->

Research Article Plant Genetics

## Sampling strategies for sugarcane using either clonal replicates or diverse genotypes can bias the conclusions of RNA-Seq studies

Victor Hugo Mello 1  , Ana Letycia Basso Garcia 1  , Fernando Henrique Correr 1  , Guilherme Kenichi Hosaka 1  , Monalisa Sampaio Carneiro 2  and Gabriel Rodrigues Alves Margarido 1 

1 Universidade de São Paulo, Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, Departamento de Genética, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.

2 Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Centro de Ciências Agrárias, Departamento de Biotecnologia e Produção Vegetal e Animal, Araras, SP , Brazil.

## Abstract

A key procedure for ensuring statistical confidence in differential gene expression analyses is to use biological replicates to compare distinct groups. Biological replicates allow the estimation of the residual variation in the gene expression levels among samples of a given experimental condition. In sugarcane, it is possible to obtain an estimate of residual variability at two levels: among samples of distinct genotypes of the same experimental treatment, or clonal replicates of the same genotype. The sequencing costs are often a limitation to leveraging both these levels in the same study, stressing the relevance of efforts to determine an appropriate experimental design. We aim to investigate this question by comparing the transcriptional profiles of young sugarcane culms with different sucrose levels using both sampling strategies. Our results show that clonal replicates provided enough statistical power to identify nearly three times more deferentially expressed genes than the more diverse strategy. However, it resulted in potentially less meaningful biological results, because many of the significant genes were likely related to the particular genotype of choice, rather than representing a common expression profile for the compared groups. This study supports the development of sound experimental designs in new studies regarding differential expression for sugarcane.

Keywords: Differential gene expression, vegetatively propagated crops, biological replicates, sugarcane transcriptomics, missing samples.

Received: October 08, 2022; Accepted: January 31, 2023.

## Introduction

The genus Saccharum comprises six species, of which S. spontaneum and S. robustum are the only wild representatives, spread over a large area in Asia and Indonesia, and the others are  domesticated species S.  officinarum , S.  barberi , S. sinense , and S. edule .  The first sugarcane hybrids were obtained from the crossing of S.  officinarum and S.  spontaneum , followed by backcrossing to S. officinarum , such that they inherited the high sugar yield from the former species and the pathogen resistance, adaptability, and increased vigor of the  latter  (Irvine,  1999;  Piperidis et  al. ,  2010).  Sugarcane cultivation accounts for 86% of the worldwide production of  sugar,  despite  the  increasing  allocation  of  its  juice  for ethanol production. Moreover, the sugarcane residue after juice extraction, called bagasse, is a byproduct that can be used for energy generation and production of bioplastics (Aguilar et  al., 2019;  OECD/FAO, 2020). The crop is a renewable source of fuel and presents a significant advantage over fossil fuels due to the reduced emission of greenhouse gases (Goldemberg, 2008).

Sugarcane breeding programs usually rely on a few recurrent crosses between elite parents or wild germplasm to

Send  correspondence  to  Gabriel  Rodrigues Alves  Margarido. Universidade de São Paulo, Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, Departamento de Genética, Avenida Pádua Dias, 11, 13418-900, Piracicaba, SP , Brazil. E-mail: gramarga@usp.br.

produce genotypes with desired traits, mainly sugar or fiber yield and resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses (Heinz and Tew, 1987; de Souza Barbosa et al., 2002; Jackson, 2005). Therefore, each breeding program develops new hybrid varieties per cycle, a few of which are commercially released (Cursi et al. , 2022). From the milieu of available genotypes, scientific investigations in sugarcane are often based on a few elite lines that are recurrently used. For instance, two genome assemblies were recently published for the hybrids R570 - a major model in sugarcane genomic studies - and SP80-3280 (Garsmeur et al ., 2018; Souza et al., 2019). These efforts are remarkably relevant for sugarcane genomic research, given the complexity of its genome.

Also, these hybrids show a large variation in chromosome number and genome constitution. S. officinarum (2n = 8x = 80) and S. spontaneum (2n = 40-128), the parental species, have high levels of ploidy and complex genomes per se (Bremer, 1925; Panje and Babu, 1960). Chromosome number multiplicity and molecular evidence have led to the acceptance of the basic number of x = 8 for S. spontaneum (Liu et al. , 2016); however, the description of a wild accession with x = 10 brought a new panorama to the evolutionary history of the genus (Meng et al. , 2020). These facts reveal an intricate set of hurdles concerning the understanding of sugarcane genomics, which must be considered for data-driven experiments. Hence, many sugarcane studies focus on transcriptomic data to avoid the challenges imposed by its genome (at least partially).

More specifically, the use of phenotypic trait variation between genotypes is a common approach found in differential expression studies. Gene expression studies in sugarcane have been conducted using a single genotype to represent the phenotypic group (Casu et al., 2007; Papini-Terzi et al., 2009; Casu et al., 2015; Vicentini et al., 2015; Dharshini et al., 2016; Rody et al., 2019; Nawae et al. , 2020; Selvi et al., 2020), as well as multiple genotypes per group (Papini-Terzi et al., 2009; Ferreira et al., 2016; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017; Hoang et al., 2017; Correr et al., 2020). Biological replicates provide more accurate estimates of transcript abundances when comparing samples from two treatment levels. Clones from the same genotype are subject to variability in their expression levels due to factors such as interactions with the environment and other organisms. Still, the transcriptional variation within clones is expected to be smaller when compared to plants from different genotypes, which decreases the dispersion of gene quantification estimates. Statistical parameters such as means of expression levels and their residual variances are the main variables considered in modern differential expression tests, which highlights the relevance of the choice of approach for performing these studies. While the use of clones renders a more homogeneous set of samples, and consequently more statistical power to detect differences in  expression between groups, it also restrains the set of samples to a limited number of genotypes. Nevertheless, other concerns about the comparison of contrasting groups in RNA-Seq analysis were raised, such as minimum sample sizes and the use of technical replicates for ensuring reproducibility (Conesa et al., 2016).

Here,  we  evaluate  the  influence  of  using  clonal replicates  or  multiple  genotypes  in  the  contrasting  groups when performing differential  gene  expression  analysis. The comparison of approaches we propose relies both on quantitative estimates of differentially expressed genes and qualitative functional enrichment tests. We aim to present an information-based criterion for selecting biological replicates for  further  experiments using RNA-Seq, particularly for sugarcane, whose genomic properties can deviate dramatically among genotypes.

## Material and Methods

## Biological material and RNA-Seq

The genotypes chosen for this study are part of the Brazilian Panel of Sugarcane Genotypes, located in Araras Brazil. They were selected from 254 genotypes to represent elite lines and commercial hybrids used in Brazil, as well as ancestral species of the Saccharum complex (Medeiros et al., 2020). First, for the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), we selected 12 genotypes and separated them into four groups with three members each. This categorization divided genotypes based on their content of soluble solids, measured in ºBrix: VLB (Very Low ºBrix), LB (Low ºBrix), HB (High ºBrix), VHB (Very High ºBrix). The phenotypic characterization of this panel of genotypes, including the content of soluble solids, is described in Barreto et al. (2019). Next, for the strategy based on clones (SBC), we chose one representative of each group and used three clonal replicates of these genotypes to represent the corresponding phenotypic groups (Table 1).

Immature culms (internode +1) from all 24 plants were collected in June 2016, in Araras, followed by extraction of total RNA with the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. We prepared the RNASeq libraries of polyadenylated transcripts using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT (Illumina) protocol. These libraries were sequenced in a HiSeq 2500 equipment (Illumina), resulting in paired-end reads 2x100 bp long. The 12 libraries of the SBC were sequenced in three lanes, in combination with other samples not used in this study, with final sequencing depth corresponding to eight samples per lane. For the SBDG we used a single lane exclusively for the twelve samples.

Table 1 Genotypes selected to compose each ºBrix group for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and based on diverse genotypes (SBDG). In the former strategy, we sampled the immature internode +1 of three clonal replicates (R1, R2, and R3) for each genotype per group, and samples from three different genotypes per group for the latter. The genotypes IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 were represented in both strategies, using samples from different plants.

| Group   | Genotype          |   # of samples in SBC |   # of samples in SBDG | Soluble solids (ºBrix ± s.d.)   |
|---------|-------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|
|         | Krakatau          |                     0 |                      1 | 12.03 ± 2.02                    |
| VLB     | SES205A           |                     0 |                      1 | 13.99 ± 3.14                    |
|         | IN84-58           |                     3 |                      1 | 14.78 ± 1.89                    |
|         | Criolla Rayada    |                     0 |                      1 | 16.53 ± 1.37                    |
| LB      | IJ76-317          |                     0 |                      1 | 17.68 ± 1.75                    |
|         | F36-819           |                     3 |                      1 | 18.05 ± 1.51                    |
|         | White Transparent |                     0 |                      1 | 19.60 ± 2.01                    |
| HB      | RB92579           |                     0 |                      1 | 19.77 ± 1.29                    |
|         | R570              |                     3 |                      1 | 20.69 ± 1.24                    |
|         | White Mauritius   |                     0 |                      1 | 21.25 ± 1.38                    |
| VHB     | SP80-3280         |                     3 |                      1 | 21.29 ± 1.88                    |
|         | RB835486          |                     0 |                      1 | 21.85 ± 1.86                    |

## Downsampling and quality control

Because the SBC data showed higher average counts per sample, we first carried out a downsampling step. This procedure aimed to balance the differences in sequencing depth between both datasets, achieving the same amount of information for the two strategies. For that, we applied the sample function of the Seqtk suite (https://github.com/lh3/ seqtk), using as parameters a fixed random seed -s100 and the probability of removing a read proportional to the ratio of the average read counts of SBDG and SBC samples. After that, we used the programs Cutadapt v1.18 (Martin, 2011) and Trimmomatic v0.38 (Bolger et al. , 2014) to: i) trim residual sequences of Illumina adapters from raw reads; ii) remove base pairs with Phred score less than 20 in a window of 5bp; iii) trim the first 13bp of each read; and iv) remove paired reads shorter than 50 bp (Table S1).

## De novo transcriptome assembly and functional annotation

We chose to perform a de novo transcriptome assembly based on all samples to minimize the potential effect of representation biases on genes and alleles from different genotypes. For that, we used the libraries after downsampling and quality control as input to Trinity v2.8.0 (Grabherr et al., 2011), using the default parameters except for the normalization by readset. Functional annotation was carried out with blastx and blastp (Altschul et al., 1990) significant hits (e-value &lt; 10 -5 ) against the Swiss-Prot database, using ORFs identified in the transcriptome with Transdecoder (https://github.com/ TransDecoder/TransDecoder). We also annotated protein domains using hmmscan v3.2.1 (Eddy, 2009) with the Pfam database. All these sources of information were compiled with the software Trinotate v3.1.1 (https://github.com/Trinotate/ Trinotate) to produce the final annotation. This reference was further assessed by the identification of conserved orthologs among green plants and monocotyledons, using the software BUSCO v3 (Simão et al., 2015) with databases in OrthoDB10.

Next, we used the quasi-mapping strategy of salmon v0.12.0 (Patro et  al., 2017)  to  quantify  the  expression  of the assembled transcripts, separately for each sample. The transcriptome file was used to build an index with a k-mer size of 31 bp, with the additional parameters of GC bias correction and validate mappings to achieve higher mapping rates and confidence levels. We then summarized transcript counts per gene and normalized to obtain expression estimates in counts per million (CPM). CPM values were used to quantify gene expression for all downstream analyses.

## Comparison of differential expression results with the full dataset

For differential expression analyses, we initially excluded lowly expressed genes, by filtering out genes that did not show a CPM greater than one for at least three samples. We did this filtering individually for each strategy, resulting in different sets of filtered genes for SBC and SBDG. Next, the following steps were repeated with the same criteria for both strategies, using the edgeR package (Robinson et al., 2010). We normalized the gene counts with the trimmed mean of

M-values method (Robinson and Oshlack , 2010) and built MDS (Multidimensional scaling) plots using the top 2,000 genes with the greatest pairwise variation between samples.

For  statistical  tests  of  differential  expression,  we considered a model for gene counts parametrized as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for sample i in an experimental group, gene g , π g,i the fraction of gene counts per gene and sample, dispersion Φ g , libraries size N i , average counts µ g,i = N i π g,i , and variance Φ g = π g,i ( 1+π g,i Φ g ). The common dispersion is the squared Biological Coefficient of Variation (BCV), which considers the common dispersion from all genes. The use of a local regression of genewise dispersion provides an additional level of information for dispersion estimates for each gene. As a result, Φ g represents a compromise between the dispersion of counts for gene g and the borrowed genewise dispersion from genes with close average CPM.

3 2 We designed three orthogonal contrasts to test for differential expression for each gene, namely VLB × VHB. HB.LB, corresponding to the null hypothesis H 0 :π g,VLB = π g,VHB +  π g,HB +  π g,LB  , VHB × HB.LB  to H 0 :π g,VHB = π g,HB + π g,LB , and HB × LB to H 0 :π g,HB = π g,LB .   A likelihood  ratio test was performed for each combination of gene, contrast, and strategy to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), with p-values adjusted by the false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) at a 0.05 significance threshold.

Using the sets of DEGs and the annotated transcriptome, we performed functional enrichment analyses considering the frequency of Gene Ontology (GO) terms in the background reference and each set. Because the average gene length may vary among GO categories, care was taken to calculate effective gene lengths, based on the average length of genes in each sample weighted by their expression levels. We used the goseq package (Young et al., 2010) to perform the functional enrichment test for each represented GO term (p &lt; 0.01, after adjusting for multiple tests with the FDR approach).

## Impact of missing samples on differential expression results

In addition to using all samples of each strategy, we also analyzed the effect of systematically removing samples on the differential expression results. This procedure can provide a better understanding of the effect of individual samples on the downstream analysis, as well as establishing a comparison between this approach and the use of full data. We have developed a method to compare different combinations of subsets of samples, under the condition that valid combinations must have at least two samples per group. This restriction is necessary because minimal replication per group is required to properly calculate gene dispersions, even if the estimates are less accurate. Because there are four groups with three samples each, 255 combinations exist, all of which were individually tested for differential expression with the same contrasts previously designed. The number of combinations

of  different  numbers of removed samples is given by the binomial factor:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which k represents the number of samples per group ( k = 3 ), g represents the number of groups ( g = 4 ), and i represents the number of removed samples, ranging from one to four. For each combination, we removed genes with low expression levels (CPM &gt; 1 in less than two samples) and recorded the differential expression result as one of the following categories: (a) upregulated, (b) downregulated, (c) not significant, or (d) filtered out. One result was obtained for each gene, combination of samples, contrast and sampling strategy. We applied the same workflow for performing differential expression and functional enrichment tests as in the full data analyses.

Among all tested combinations of samples in our subsampling  evaluation,  one  of  special  interest  is  that composed of the eight genotypes present exclusively in SBDG. The strategy based on clones comprised a single genotype per group of soluble solids content, namely, IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 (Table 1). For SBDG, we chose another eight genotypes in addition to these, which we call exclusive genotypes of SBDG, specifically SES205A, Krakatau, Criolla Rayada, IJ76-317, White Transparent, RB92579, White Mauritius, and RB835486. We also performed analyses of differential expression with this subset of samples.

## Code and data availability

All the scripts are available at the Github repository (github.com/victor-h14/BiologicalReplicates). The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB44302 for SBDG and PRJEB40481 for SBC.

## Results

## Gene identification in the sugarcane transcriptome

The objective of our study was to compare the sampling strategies  based  on  clones  (SBC)  and  based  on  diverse genotypes (SBDG) for RNA-Seq studies. Because of that, we performed a de novo transcriptome assembly using all 24 samples from both sampling strategies to use as a reference for gene quantification. The resulting transcriptome included 598,874 transcripts for a total of 262,281 assembled genes (Table S2). Reads from both strategies were evenly represented in the assembly, with an average mapping rate of 76.5% among samples (Table S1). Genes had an average size of 932.63 bp and the transcript N50 was 1,687 bp. The majority of genes had a single corresponding transcript isoform (64.3%). To assess the quality of our transcriptome, we checked the representation of conserved single-copy orthologs from Viridiplantae  and  Liliopsida  clades  -  green  plants  and monocotyledons, respectively. We identified 95.1% of the 430 orthologs conserved in green plants without sequence fragmentation. For the set of orthologs in monocots, 93.1% of 3,278 orthologs were fully represented.

## Comparison of differential expression results between strategies

Our goal  was  to  compare  both  datasets  based  on the  results  from  the  differential  expression  and  functional enrichment analyses. We followed a standard procedure for these tasks using edgeR and goseq. After library sizes were normalized, the quantification outputs still contained a large amount of lowly expressed genes. We selected genes with CPM &gt; 1 in at least three samples, for each strategy separately, resulting in different sets of kept genes for SBC and SBDG. The former presented 42,566 genes after filtering, and 41,934 remained in the latter (Figure S1).

An  initial  exploratory  investigation  allowed  for assessing the main characteristics of expression profiles with a multidimensional scaling plot (Figure 1A). For the SBC, we observed clustering of replicates from each genotype, indicating high similarity in the expression profiles of clonal replicates.  As expected, the first dimension of the plot separated replicates of genotype IN84-58 from the remaining groups, reflecting their contrasting genetic backgrounds. On the other hand, the biological variance of gene expression was much higher in the diverse approach than in the clone approach. In SBDG we found a little overlap of samples from the same phenotypic group, except for the VLB genotypes, which again were isolated from the others by differences in the first component. No clear pattern was observed for genotypes of VHB and HB. In fact, only two LB S. officinarum accessions, Criolla Rayada and IJ76-316, clustered apart.

The MDS analysis provided a broad view of the overall patterns of transcription abundances for the set of samples, but did not allow a closer assessment of individual genes. We then used the differential expression testing approach for a detailed investigation of the transcriptome expression profiles. We arranged the four groups of samples into three orthogonal contrasts.  Hence, we conducted three tests of differential expression for each gene. The quantity of DEGs identified via the SBC largely surpassed that of SBDG for all contrasts, especially  in VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB  (Figure  1B, File S1). In these two contrasts, we can observe a mass of significant  DEGs in relatively low absolute logFC values for  SBC. Conversely, only a few DEGs were significant for  SBDG, even for genes showing fold changes of large magnitude. We identified non-significant genes even at |logF C| &gt; 10, standing for more than a thousand-fold variation of read counts. The non-significance of genes with high values of logFC is possible because the adopted likelihood model for gene abundance considers gene counts and variance within groups for the likelihood ratio test. We can thus (at least partly) attribute the lower number of DEGs for the SBDG to the higher residual variance in gene counts observed with this strategy. An indicator of dispersion with a meaningful interpretation is the Biological Coefficient of Variation (BCV), calculated as the square root of the negative binomial dispersion of counts. The average BCV for all filtered genes of the SBC was 0.087, and 0.440 for the SBDG, representing a five-fold variation between strategies. In addition, for the set of genes retained after filtering for both strategies (37,535 genes), 98% of them

showed higher BCV in the SBDG. These numbers reinforce the role of dispersion as a key parameter that distinguishes the approaches regarding differential expression.

The intersection of sets of DEGs between strategies revealed that the majority of genes identified as significant in the SBDG was also significant in the SBC, but the opposite was not true ( Figure 1E-G). About 71% of DEGs detected with the SBDG were shared with the other strategy, for each of  the  three  contrasts. This  fact  suggests  that  using  more diverse genotypes favored the identification of genes with similar expression patterns among the group members. The observation regarding the high residual variance for VHB x HB.LB and HB x LB also strengthens this hypothesis, because only the more homogeneously expressed genes achieved significance. On the other hand, the use of clones was also able to identify many other genes as differentially expressed, which are possibly genotype-specific and may not be directly associated with the phenotype of interest.

The current work presents a systematic analysis of the effects of competing strategies of biological replication over gene expression studies. Our goal is not to provide a biological interpretation of expression patterns, but to justify with biological reasoning the use of each methodology. Therefore, we chose the functional enrichment analysis as a meaningful approach for understanding the consequences of data-mining over the sets of filtered and differentially expressed genes. Within each set of genes that passed the expression filter, we found 12,364 and 11,979 genes containing at least one attributed GO term for SBC and SBDG, respectively (File S2).

Using these genes as a background reference, we performed a functional enrichment analysis to identify GO terms more frequent among DEGs than expected by chance alone ( Figure 2, File S3). For the SBDG, the contrast VHB x HB.LB resulted in only one enriched term (adenosine diphosphate binding), and HB x LB had no enriched GO.

## Assessment of strategies using subsets of samples

When  removing  a  fraction  of  samples  from  the experimental design, the average values of gene counts and variance are modified and less precise, such that the resulting set of DEGs may be different. For this reason, we adopted the strategy of systematically removing samples as a validating procedure of the expression results. Also, this approach evaluates the effect of variation on the number of samples per group, such as in unbalanced experiments, or missing samples. Handling mistakes, low volumes of biological material, difficulties in preparing the sequencing libraries, and other unexpected events often cause (random) loss of samples. Because each strategy includes 12 samples divided into four groups, and there must be at least two per group for estimating the dispersion parameter, we could jointly remove a maximum of four samples. These restrictions produced 255 combinations, which were individually tested for differential expression.

We observed that, as the number of removed samples changed from one to four, the more differential expression disagreed with the results obtained with the full dataset. Albeit at low rates, we could identify genes with an inverted result of

Figure 1 Gene expression patterns and differentially expressed genes for both sampling strategies. ( a ) Multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot showing pairwise distances between samples based on the most divergent genes for each pair. The panels represent the MDS plot for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), respectively. ( b , c , d ) Mean-difference plot grid showing differentially expressed genes for all contrasts and strategies. Fold changes (logFC) and average expression levels in counts per million (logCPM) are shown in base 2 log scales. The rows indicate the three orthogonal contrasts, while the columns correspond to the strategies of sampling biological replicates. Colors represent the result of differential expression tests (p &lt; 0.05, after FDR correction for multiple tests). ( e , f , g ) Differentially expressed genes shared by the strategies based on clones and on diverse genotypes. The diagrams represent the number of genes detected as significantly differentially expressed in the contrasts. The strategy based on clones is in blue, while the strategy based on diverse genotypes is in green. The figures represent orthogonal contrasts VLB × HB.LB. VHB ( b , e ), VHB × HB.LB ( c , f ), and HB × LB ( d , g ).

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 Enriched gene ontology terms by strategy and contrast. There was no significant test result for HB × LB in the strategy based on diverse genotypes (p &lt; 0.01, after FDR adjustment). The numeric axis represents the number of differentially expressed genes for each particular gene ontology term.

<!-- image -->

differential expression, i.e. , miscalls of up or downregulation, which occurred from 10 -6 to 10 -5 % of genes for the SBC, and from 10 -5 to 10 -4  % for the SBDG. Using the original data results as a gold standard (full set of samples), the strategy based on clones showed a relatively lower percentage of false negatives and a higher percentage of false positives - green and purple curves in (Figure 3), respectively.

Because our systematic removal of samples provided a large number of differential expression tests for each gene, we could establish a high confidence set of DEGs - those with at least 95% of tests with the same results ( Table 2). We then used this high confidence set for performing a functional enrichment analysis (Figure 4, File S4). The enriched GO terms for the full set of DEGs and the high confidence set were essentially different. There were only three enriched terms for the SBDG, of which two had also been detected with the full dataset, and the other was only significant for the SBC. Given the low number of annotated and differentially expressed genes for the contrasts VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB, it was not possible to detect any enriched term for the

Figure 3 Effect of sample removal on the results of differential expression. The values represented by the continuous (SBC) and dashed (SBDG) curves are the averages of differential expression tests for all possible combinations and contrasts, as a function of the number of removed samples. The red curve indicates the concordant genes in the original and subsampled datasets; in yellow, the differentially expressed genes with inverted results, whether up or downregulated; in green, genes that were not significant due to subsampling; in blue, filtered genes after subsampling; and in purple, genes that appeared as spuriously differentially expressed with subsampling.

<!-- image -->

Table 2 The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the high confidence set. We identified these genes as differentially expressed in at least 95% of the subsampling combinations when removing from one to four samples in each strategy. We considered only the combinations which presented a minimum of two samples per experimental group. For each strategy, we show the total number of DEGs and those annotated with gene ontology terms.

|                 | SBC DEGs   | SBC DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   |
|-----------------|------------|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Contrast        | Total      | Annotated  | Total       | Annotated   |
| VLB × VHB.HB.LB | 14240      | 2688       | 2960        | 458         |
| VHB × HB.LB     | 5774       | 829        | 44          | 7           |
| HB × LB         | 5371       | 994        | 34          | 7           |

SBDG. Analyzing exclusively the SBC, nearly 73% of the terms were also enriched in the full dataset for VLB x VHB. HB.LB, 50% for VHB x HB.LB and 75% for HB x LB. Also, the  number of enriched terms was high, even with fewer DEGs for the test. Some terms were exclusive for the high confidence set, such as zinc ion binding, proteolysis, and negative regulation of translation. The opposite also occurred, such as for kinase activity.

## Contribution of SBDG exclusive genotypes for differential expression

We compared the DEGs identified in the subgroup of genotypes absent in SBC with the data from SBC and SBDG, using the same parameters for the analysis ( Figure 5). It was possible to observe distinct patterns between the contrast VLB x VHB.HB.LB and the others, regarding the number of DEGs called by each approach. In the first contrast, the total number for SBDG was greater than for the exclusive set, as opposed to the results for the last two contrasts. We also highlight that the larger fraction of DEGs detected in SBDG concentrated in the intersection with the other approaches.

## Discussion

Analyzing the patterns found in the MDS plots, we can infer that transcriptional profiles agreed only partially with the phenotypic assortment of genotypes into four categories of  soluble  solids  content  ( Figure 1).  This  plot  also  shows a recurrent observation in the other analyses regarding the sharp disparities found between VLB and the other groups. This fact is evident in the separation of samples in Figure 1, the increased number of DEGs from the VLB x VHB.HB.LB tests, when compared to the other contrasts, and the functional enrichment from SBDG ( Figure 2). A  likely  explanation is  the  genetic background of the genotypes, because VLB comprises S. spontaneum accessions, while VHB, HB, and LB comprise S. officinarum and commercial hybrids. Despite having a genomic contribution from both parental species, commercial hybrids underwent backcrossing to S. officinarum to  enhance sugar yield, which makes them more alike to this species in terms of expression. Our result matches the clustering pattern found in the MDS plot for sugarcane leaf samples, in which S. spontaneum genotypes separate from the remaining (Correr et al., 2020). This interpretation also agrees with cytogenetic information from R570, because about 80% of  its  chromosomes presented similarity to S.  officinarum and 10% to S. spontaneum (D'Hont et al., 1996; Garsmeur et al., 2018). Another reasonable explanation for the observed disparity of VLB is the imbalance in chromosome numbers, which remains to be assessed by karyotyping. Changes in ploidy levels and aneuploidy can lead to systematic differences in phenotype and gene expression (Liqin et al., 2019; Johnson et al., 2020).

This assumption was reinforced by the SBDG contrasts, where VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB showed only a few DEGs. When considering the fraction of significant DEGs in common between strategies using the full dataset, the amount of shared significant tests was nearly constant over the three contrasts in SBDG (Figure 1). The same was not true for SBC, which had a rate of shared DEGs ranging from 2 to 32%. A feasible explanation is that sugarcane genotypes have high variability of expression among each other, and the use of clones provides enough statistical power to detect it. However, a substantial proportion of these genes might not be actually related to the  biological  phenomenon of interest, because the lower variability in the SBC led to the identification of DEGs with lower fold-change magnitudes. Extrapolating these results, we can suggest that the SBC was not fully representative of the groups of interest, because of the low agreement of DEGs identified in common with the SBDG.

Several of the identified enriched GO terms fit in molecular mechanisms with no explicit relationship to the accumulation of sugars or carbon partitioning. For instance, the  contrast  HB × LB in SBC, which represents a direct comparison of the genotypes R570 and F36-819, showed a significant enrichment of kinase activity, which may indeed represent an important mechanism that distinguishes the phenotypes of these plants. However, phosphorylation is a broad molecular mechanism of signal transduction, and it could be related to other processes other than sugar accumulation. Besides, the expression patterns of genes associated with protein phosphorylation were not consistent among the other

Figure 4 Enriched GO terms by strategy and contrast for the high confidence set of DEGs. This set contains genes with a significant test for differential expression in more than 95% of combinations of samples (p &lt; 0.01, after FDR adjustment).

<!-- image -->

genotypes. On the other hand, some of the terms found in the SBDG functional enrichment are coherent with observable phenotypic traits, e.g .,  recognition  of  pollen  and  cellulose biosynthetic process. Pollen recognition is a potentially vital activity for genotypes in the VLB group, because it is composed uniquely of wild accessions, which probably are prone to perform sexual reproduction without human assistance. Also, the discrepant levels of fiber in VLB × VHB.HB.LB groups corroborate the enrichment of cellulose biosynthetic activity. With the outcomes of functional enrichment for the high confidence set, we could recognize several GO terms in disagreement with the DEGs based on the full set. The terms discussed above such as pollen recognition, cellulose biosynthetic process, and kinase activity were not significant for these high confidence genes. These examples highlight the lack of similar expression patterns among all samples.

Besides the biological and residual sources of variation in  gene  expression quantitation, stochastic processes also contribute to the variance of RNA-Seq data, such as the random sampling of transcripts in library preparation. For SBDG, we could also consider that the genotypes in each group have different contributions to the differential expression result. More precisely, combining a diverse set of genotypes into an experimental group increases the overall variability of expression levels for most genes and modifies the average counts per group.

We presented a selection of four genotypes for the SBC, which is one particular choice among 81 (3 4 ) possible combinations if maintaining the same categories from the SBDG. Examining the wide distribution of genotypes in the MDS plot for SBDG ( Figure 1), we can presume that the choice of genotypes can lead to sharply discordant sets of DEGs. This

Figure 5 Differentially expressed genes shared by three sets of samples: SBC, SBDG, and SBDG-exclusive genotypes. The method for filtering genes with low expression was the same for the three sets, adopting a more permissive criterion due to the lower number of samples in the exclusive set (CPM &gt; 1 for at least two samples). We only considered the genes passing the low expression filtering criterion in all sets (38,420 genes). The diagrams represent contrasts VLB × HB.LB.VHB ( a ), VHB × HB.LB ( b ), and HB × LB ( c ). Correlation of log fold changes among the two strategies and the set of SBDG-exclusive samples, for contrast VLB × VHB.HB.LB ( d ). In the main diagonal, the histograms show how the distribution of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and non-DEGs, as a function of the log fold change (logFC). The classification of genes considered the result of differential expression for all pairwise groups of strategies (SBC, SBDG, and SBDG-exclusive genotypes). Pink points represent genes with a significant test for a given pair of groups, and gray points represent non-significant genes for the same pair.

<!-- image -->

is a result of the faulty coherence of genotypes inside the groups VHB, HB, and LB. Furthermore, the combination-sensitive set of identified DEGs could drive mistaken conclusions regarding the biological issue of interest. For example, a specific gene might be called differentially expressed due exclusively to the choice of sampled genotypes, instead of representing a general phenomenon for other genotypes with similar phenotypic characteristics. The outcomes of the analyses using subsets of samples reinforce this hypothesis ( Figure 3). We can observe an increasing number of genes with contradictory results of differential expression tests when compared to the full-data tests. This  fact  implies  that  simply  including  or  not  some genotypes may lead to changes in the list of DEGs. Another result  that  supports  the  caveats  on  genotype  choice  is  the number of DEGs for VHB x HB.LB and HB × LB contrasts (Figure 5). In the former contrast, the exclusive genotypes of the SBDG showed 625 DEGs that could only be found with these samples, versus 31 in SBDG. The difference was even more prominent for HB × LB. Notably, Criolla Rayada and IJ76-317 are S. officinarum accessions that integrate the LB group, both with a discrepant expression profile according to the MDS analysis. The simple inclusion of F36-819 in this group might have been enough to disrupt the homogeneity detected between the other two genotypes. These observations show how the lack of uniformity in the SBDG genotypes leads to a low number of significant DEGs. Moreover, they indicate that this uniformity may be sensible to the choice of genotypes to form the experimental groups.

The behavior of (mis)matches in the detection of DEGs (Figure S2, S3) can be helpful to illustrate some properties of each strategy. First, they illustrate the more robust response of the SBC regarding the removal of samples by the lower rate of mismatches. This fact reinforces that SBC showed increased statistical power to detect DEGs. Second, these results also suggest that individual samples can have a determinant role on the identification of differential expression for a considerable number of genes, mainly for the SBDG. As shown in Figure S3, the n i × n i grids did not reveal a uniform or linear distribution pattern of the power to detect differential expression. There were both rows and columns densely occupied by DEGs, in patterns contingent on the number of removed samples. They occurred in multiples of 25% for three samples and 33% for four, which correspond to the fractions of combinations without a specific sample. Figure S2 revealed a similar pattern, noticeable by the steep inclines of cumulative distributions for particular mismatch rates.

We suggested that the SBDG yielded fewer DEGs due to combining genotypes with more variable expression patterns than the SBC. Also, our interpretation of the results presented evidence towards the prevalence of more biologically meaningful DEGs for SBDG, instead of simply revealing genotype-specific profiles. However, a feasible criticism over these hypotheses is that using a collection of genotypes per phenotypic group could still lead to genotype-specific DEGs, but for more than one genotype at once. A necessary step to avoid this issue is to choose a diverse set of genotypes for the experimental groups, which should be unrelated and representative of the population of interest. For tackling this question, we performed the complete analysis procedure using the genotypes exclusive to the SBDG, such that we could assess the direct contribution of the genotypes shared with the SBC, the genotypes absent in SBC, and the intersection between them. Interestingly, this analysis showed that the intersection between SBC and the exclusive set concentrated most of the SBDG genes in all contrasts (from 37 to 48% of DEGs). This result agrees with the expectation of a shared set of genes among all 12 genotypes. Moreover, the correlations of logFC in VLB x VHB.HB.LB among the approaches revealed that SBDG had an intermediate pattern for differential expression between SBC and the exclusive set of samples ( Figure 5). Another important observation is that the increased number of samples for SBDG compared to the exclusive set of samples led to a larger number of DEGs in the first contrast and a smaller number in the other two. Thus, we can hypothesize that as the number of genotypes per group increased, the issue of detecting genotype-specific DEGs and genes with reduced biological meaning decreased.

Our results emphasize that sampling strategies are sources of bias in differential expression analysis. This conclusion draws special attention to vegetatively propagated species, as is the case of sugarcane, because many researchers opt to use clones as biological replicates. We suggest that the choice of replication strategy should be planned carefully. This recommendation joins previous guidelines for differential gene expression studies, such as the number of biological samples, library size, and sequencing design (Conesa et al., 2016; Lamarre et al., 2018).

With the increasing application of next-generation sequencing to investigate complex transcriptomes, such as that of sugarcane, recent studies aim to apply these techniques to  unravel  the  molecular  mechanisms controlling several phenotypic traits. However, a single biological replicate in each contrasting group is not enough for performing this sort of analysis, leaving to the researcher the choice of a suitable experimental design. Our study intended to illustrate the strengths and caveats inherent to two sampling strategies for biological replication, namely by using a diverse group of genotypes with common phenotypic characteristics or clones from the same genotype, chosen to be representative of this group. The results provided evidence of discrepancies in (i) quantitative terms, regarding the number of genes detected as differentially expressed, (ii) consistency, when subjected to self-validation using subsampling, and (iii) inferred biological conclusions from the functional annotation of differentially expressed genes. These analyses suggest that the use of clones as biological replicates may yield somewhat restricted results, biased by the particular choice of genotypes. Regardless of these concerns, the direct comparison of two genotypes can still be useful in particular situations. For instance, when there is no need to understand how a broad phenomenon occurs for a species, or when the aim is actually to uncover genotypespecific mechanisms. On the other hand, the presence of a representative set of genotypes within the same group can lead to more reasonable biological conclusions. In any case, it is possible to combine these strategies to refine the level of details, if economically viable. This research offers support for experimental design planning of new studies using differential expression as a method of investigation in sugarcane and other plants with high genomic complexity.

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development - CNPq (grant number 459162/2014-4) and by grant #2015/22993-7, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP). This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001. V.H.M. was the recipient of grant #2018/21345-0, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP), and a CNPq scholarship.

## Conflict of Interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions

VHM performed all data analyses and drafted the manuscript. ALBG, FHC, and GKH collected the samples and performed RNA extraction. MSC was responsible for the field experiment. GRAM and MSC conceived the experiment, supervised the data analysis, and corrected the manuscript.

## References

Aguilar NM, Arteaga-Cardona F, de Anda Reyes ME, GervacioArciniega JJ and Salazar-Kuri U (2019) Magnetic bioplastics based on isolated cellulose from cotton and sugarcane bagasse. Mater Chem Phys 238:121921.

- Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW and Lipman DJ (1990) Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol Biol 215:403-410.
- Barreto FZ, Rosa JRBF, Balsalobre TWA, Pastina MM, Silva RR, Hoffmann HP, de Souza AP, Garcia AAF and Carneiro MS (2019) A genome-wide association study identified loci for yield component traits in sugarcane (Saccharum spp.). PLoS One 14:e0219843.
- Benjamini Y and Hochberg Y (1995) Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J Roy Stat Soc B Met 57:289-300.
- Bolger AM, Lohse M and Usadel B (2014) Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30:21142120
- Bremer G (1925) The cytology of the sugarcane. Genetica 7:293-322.
- Casu  RE,  Jarmey  JM,  Bonnett  GD  and  Manners  JM  (2007) Identification  of  transcripts  associated  with  cell  wall metabolism and development in the stem of sugarcane by Affymetrix GeneChip Sugarcane Genome Array expression profiling. Funct Integr Genomic 7:153-167.
- Casu RE, Rae AL, Nielsen JM, Perroux JM, Bonnett GD and Manners JM (2015) Tissue-specific transcriptome analysis within the maturing sugarcane stalk reveals spatial regulation in the expression of cellulose synthase and sucrose transporter gene families. Plant Mol Biol 89:607-628.
- Conesa A, Madrigal P, Tarazona S, Gomez-Cabrero D, Cervera A, McPherson A, Szcześniak MW, Gaffney DJ, Elo LL, Zhang X et al . (2016) A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis. Genome Biol 17:13.
- Correr FH, Hosaka GK, Barreto FZ, Valadão IB, Balsalobre TWA, Furtado A, Henry RJ, Carneiro MS and Margarido GRA (2020) Differential  expression in leaves of Saccharum genotypes contrasting in biomass production provides evidence of genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC Genomics 21:673.
- Cursi DE, Hoffmann HP, Barbosa GVS, Bressiani JA, Gazaffi R, Chapola RG, Fernandes Junior AR, Balsalobre TWA, Diniz CA, Santos JM et al. (2022). History and current status of sugarcane breeding, germplasm development and molecular genetics in Brazil. Sugar Tech 24:112-133.
- de Souza Barbosa GV, Cruz MM, Soares L, Rocha AMC, Ribeiro CAG, Sousa AJR, Ferreira JLC, da Silva Barreto EJ, da Silva WCM and dos Santos AVP (2002) A brief report on sugarcane breeding program in Alagoas, Brazil. Crop Breed Appl Biot 2:613-616.
- Dharshini S, Chakravarthi M, Narayan JA, Manoj VM, Naveenarani M, Kumar R, Meena M, Ram B and Appunu C (2016) De novo sequencing and transcriptome analysis of a low temperature tolerant Saccharum  spontaneum clone  IND  00-1037.  J Biotechnol 231:280-29420.
- D'Hont A, Grivet L, Feldmann P, Glaszmann JC, Rao S and Berding N (1996) Characterisation of the double genome structure of modern sugarcane cultivars ( Saccharum spp.) by molecular cytogenetics. Mol Gen Genet 250:405-413.
- Eddy SR (2009) A new generation of homology search tools based on probabilistic inference. In: Genome Informatics 2009: Genome Inform. World Scientific, vol. 23, pp 205-211.
- Ferreira SS, Hotta CT, de Carli Poelking VG, Leite DCC, Buckeridge MS, Loureiro ME, Barbosa MHP, Carneiro MS and Souza GM (2016) Co-expression network analysis reveals transcription factors associated to cell wall biosynthesis in sugarcane. Plant Mol Biol 91:15-35.
- Garsmeur O, Droc G, Antonise R, Grimwood J, Potier B, Aitken K, Jenkins J, Martin G, Charron C, Hervouet C et al. (2018) A mosaic monoploid reference sequence for the highly complex genome of sugarcane. Nat Commun 9:2638.
- Goldemberg J (2008) The Brazilian biofuels industry. Biotechnol Biofuels 1:6.
- Grabherr MG, Haas BJ, Yassour M, Levin JZ, Thompson DA, Amit I,  Adiconis X, Fan L, Raychowdhury R, Zeng Q et al. (2011) Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome. Nat Biotechnol 29:644-652.
- Heinz  DJ  and  Tew  TL  (1987)  Hybridization  procedures.  In: Developments in crop science, Elsevier, vol. 11, pp 313-342.
- Hoang NV, Furtado A, O'Keeffe AJ, Botha FC and Henry RJ (2017) Association of gene expression with biomass content and composition in sugarcane. PloS One 12:e0183417.
- Irvine JE (1999) Saccharum species as horticultural classes. Theor Appl Genet 98:186-194.
- Jackson PA (2005) Breeding for improved sugar content in sugarcane. Field Crop Res 92:277-290.
- Johnson AF, Hou J, Yang H, Shi X, Chen C, Islam MS, Ji T, Cheng J and Birchler JA (2020) Magnitude of modulation of gene expression in aneuploid maize depends on the extent of genomic imbalance. J Genet Genomics 47:93-103.
- Lamarre S, Frasse P, Zouine M, Labourdette D, Sainderichin E, Hu G, Le Berre-Anton V, Bouzayen M and Maza E (2018) Optimization of an RNA-Seq differential gene expression analysis depending on biological replicate number and library size. Front Plant Sci 9:108.
- Liqin G, Jianguo Z, Xiaoxia L and Guodong R (2019) Polyploidyrelated differential gene expression between diploid and synthesized allotriploid and allotetraploid hybrids of Populus. Mol Breeding 39:69.
- Liu X, Li X, Liu H, Xu C, Lin X, Li C and Deng Z (2016) Phylogenetic analysis of different ploidy Saccharum spontaneum based on rDNA-ITS sequences. PLoS One 11:e0151524.
- Martin M (2011) Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from highthroughput sequencing reads. EMBnet J 17:10-12.
- Medeiros C, Balsalobre TWA and Carneiro MS (2020) Molecular diversity  and  genetic  structure  of Saccharum complex accessions. PLoS One 15:e0233211.
- Meng Z, Han J, Lin Y, Zhao Y, Lin Q, Ma X, Wang J, Zhang M, Zhang L, Yang Q et  al. (2020)  Characterization of a Saccharum spontaneum with a basic chromosome number of x= 10 provides new insights on genome evolution in genus Saccharum . Theor Appl Genet 133:187-199.
- Nawae W, Shearman JR, Tangphatsornruang S, Punpee P, Yoocha T, Sangsrakru D, Naktang C, Sonthirod C, Wirojsirasak W, Ukoskit K et  al. (2020) Differential expression between drought-tolerant and drought-sensitive sugarcane under mild and moderate water stress as revealed by a comparative analysis of leaf transcriptome. PeerJ 8:e9608.
- OECD/FAO (2020) OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2020-2029. OECD Publishing, Rome, 330 p.
- Panje RR and Babu CN (1960) Studies in Saccharum spontaneum distribution and geographical association of chromosome numbers. Cytologia 25:152-172.
- Papini-Terzi FS, Rocha FR, Vêncio RZN, Felix JM, Branco DS, Waclawovsky AJ, Del Bem LEV, Lembke CG, Costa MDL, Nishiyama MY et al. (2009) Sugarcane genes associated with sucrose content. BMC Genomics 10:120.
- Patro R, Duggal G, Love MI, Irizarry RA and Kingsford C (2017) Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nat Methods 14:417-419.
- Piperidis G, Piperidis N and D'Hont A (2010) Molecular cytogenetic investigation of chromosome composition and transmission in sugarcane. Mol Genet Genomics 284:65-73.
- Robinson MD and Oshlack A (2010) A scaling normalization method for differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biol 11:R25.
- Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ and Smyth GK (2010) edgeR: A Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26:139-140.

- Rody HVS, Bombardelli RGH, Creste S, Camargo LEA, Van Sluys MA and Monteiro-Vitorello CB (2019) Genome survey of resistance gene analogs in sugarcane: Genomic features and differential expression of the innate immune system from a smut-resistant genotype. BMC Genomics 20:809.

Selvi  A, Devi K, Manimekalai R and Prathima PT (2020) Comparative analysis of drought-responsive transcriptomes of sugarcane genotypes with differential tolerance to drought. 3 Biotech 10:236.

Simão FA, Waterhouse RM, Ioannidis P, Kriventseva EV and Zdobnov EM (2015) BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 31:3210-3212.

Souza GM, Van Sluys MA, Lembke CG, Lee H, Margarido GRA, Hotta CT, Gaiarsa JW, Diniz AL, Oliveira MdM, Ferreira SdS et al. (2019) Assembly of the 373k gene space of the polyploid sugarcane genome reveals reservoirs of functional diversity in the world's leading biomass crop. Gigascience 8:giz129.

- Thirugnanasambandam PP, Hoang NV, Furtado A, Botha FC and Henry RJ (2017) Association of variation in the sugarcane transcriptome with sugar content. BMC Genomics 18:909.

Vicentini R, Bottcher A, dos Santos Brito M, dos Santos AB, Creste S, de Andrade Landell MG, Cesarino I and Mazzafera P (2015) Large-scale transcriptome analysis of two sugarcane genotypes contrasting for lignin content. PLoS One 10:e0134909.

Young MD, Wakefield MJ, Smyth GK and Oshlack A (2010) Gene ontology analysis for RNA-seq: Accounting for selection bias. Genome Biol 11:R14.

## Supplementary material

The following online material is available for this article:

Table S1 - Processing of sequencing data.

Table S2 - Summary statistics of the de novo transcriptome assembly and its annotation with Gene Ontology terms.

Figure S1 - Number of genes kept after filtering out lowly expressed genes.

Figure S2 - Cumulative distribution of identified mismatches.

Figure S3 - Correspondence between differentially expressed genes found by SBC and SBDG per contrast and number of removed samples.

File S1 - Differential gene expression results.

File S2 - List of annotated genes in the transcriptome.

File S3 - Gene Ontology enrichment results.

File S4 - Gene Ontology enrichment for the high confidence set.

Associate Editor: Rogério Margis

License information: This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (type CC-BY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original article is properly cited.
MATERIALS
## Material and Methods

## Biological material and RNA-Seq

The genotypes chosen for this study are part of the Brazilian Panel of Sugarcane Genotypes, located in Araras Brazil. They were selected from 254 genotypes to represent elite lines and commercial hybrids used in Brazil, as well as ancestral species of the Saccharum complex (Medeiros et al., 2020). First, for the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), we selected 12 genotypes and separated them into four groups with three members each. This categorization divided genotypes based on their content of soluble solids, measured in ºBrix: VLB (Very Low ºBrix), LB (Low ºBrix), HB (High ºBrix), VHB (Very High ºBrix). The phenotypic characterization of this panel of genotypes, including the content of soluble solids, is described in Barreto et al. (2019). Next, for the strategy based on clones (SBC), we chose one representative of each group and used three clonal replicates of these genotypes to represent the corresponding phenotypic groups (Table 1).

Immature culms (internode +1) from all 24 plants were collected in June 2016, in Araras, followed by extraction of total RNA with the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. We prepared the RNASeq libraries of polyadenylated transcripts using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT (Illumina) protocol. These libraries were sequenced in a HiSeq 2500 equipment (Illumina), resulting in paired-end reads 2x100 bp long. The 12 libraries of the SBC were sequenced in three lanes, in combination with other samples not used in this study, with final sequencing depth corresponding to eight samples per lane. For the SBDG we used a single lane exclusively for the twelve samples.

Table 1 Genotypes selected to compose each ºBrix group for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and based on diverse genotypes (SBDG). In the former strategy, we sampled the immature internode +1 of three clonal replicates (R1, R2, and R3) for each genotype per group, and samples from three different genotypes per group for the latter. The genotypes IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 were represented in both strategies, using samples from different plants.

| Group   | Genotype          |   # of samples in SBC |   # of samples in SBDG | Soluble solids (ºBrix ± s.d.)   |
|---------|-------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|
|         | Krakatau          |                     0 |                      1 | 12.03 ± 2.02                    |
| VLB     | SES205A           |                     0 |                      1 | 13.99 ± 3.14                    |
|         | IN84-58           |                     3 |                      1 | 14.78 ± 1.89                    |
|         | Criolla Rayada    |                     0 |                      1 | 16.53 ± 1.37                    |
| LB      | IJ76-317          |                     0 |                      1 | 17.68 ± 1.75                    |
|         | F36-819           |                     3 |                      1 | 18.05 ± 1.51                    |
|         | White Transparent |                     0 |                      1 | 19.60 ± 2.01                    |
| HB      | RB92579           |                     0 |                      1 | 19.77 ± 1.29                    |
|         | R570              |                     3 |                      1 | 20.69 ± 1.24                    |
|         | White Mauritius   |                     0 |                      1 | 21.25 ± 1.38                    |
| VHB     | SP80-3280         |                     3 |                      1 | 21.29 ± 1.88                    |
|         | RB835486          |                     0 |                      1 | 21.85 ± 1.86                    |

## Impact of missing samples on differential expression results

In addition to using all samples of each strategy, we also analyzed the effect of systematically removing samples on the differential expression results. This procedure can provide a better understanding of the effect of individual samples on the downstream analysis, as well as establishing a comparison between this approach and the use of full data. We have developed a method to compare different combinations of subsets of samples, under the condition that valid combinations must have at least two samples per group. This restriction is necessary because minimal replication per group is required to properly calculate gene dispersions, even if the estimates are less accurate. Because there are four groups with three samples each, 255 combinations exist, all of which were individually tested for differential expression with the same contrasts previously designed. The number of combinations

of  different  numbers of removed samples is given by the binomial factor:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which k represents the number of samples per group ( k = 3 ), g represents the number of groups ( g = 4 ), and i represents the number of removed samples, ranging from one to four. For each combination, we removed genes with low expression levels (CPM &gt; 1 in less than two samples) and recorded the differential expression result as one of the following categories: (a) upregulated, (b) downregulated, (c) not significant, or (d) filtered out. One result was obtained for each gene, combination of samples, contrast and sampling strategy. We applied the same workflow for performing differential expression and functional enrichment tests as in the full data analyses.

Among all tested combinations of samples in our subsampling  evaluation,  one  of  special  interest  is  that composed of the eight genotypes present exclusively in SBDG. The strategy based on clones comprised a single genotype per group of soluble solids content, namely, IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 (Table 1). For SBDG, we chose another eight genotypes in addition to these, which we call exclusive genotypes of SBDG, specifically SES205A, Krakatau, Criolla Rayada, IJ76-317, White Transparent, RB92579, White Mauritius, and RB835486. We also performed analyses of differential expression with this subset of samples.

## Assessment of strategies using subsets of samples

When  removing  a  fraction  of  samples  from  the experimental design, the average values of gene counts and variance are modified and less precise, such that the resulting set of DEGs may be different. For this reason, we adopted the strategy of systematically removing samples as a validating procedure of the expression results. Also, this approach evaluates the effect of variation on the number of samples per group, such as in unbalanced experiments, or missing samples. Handling mistakes, low volumes of biological material, difficulties in preparing the sequencing libraries, and other unexpected events often cause (random) loss of samples. Because each strategy includes 12 samples divided into four groups, and there must be at least two per group for estimating the dispersion parameter, we could jointly remove a maximum of four samples. These restrictions produced 255 combinations, which were individually tested for differential expression.

We observed that, as the number of removed samples changed from one to four, the more differential expression disagreed with the results obtained with the full dataset. Albeit at low rates, we could identify genes with an inverted result of

Figure 1 Gene expression patterns and differentially expressed genes for both sampling strategies. ( a ) Multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot showing pairwise distances between samples based on the most divergent genes for each pair. The panels represent the MDS plot for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), respectively. ( b , c , d ) Mean-difference plot grid showing differentially expressed genes for all contrasts and strategies. Fold changes (logFC) and average expression levels in counts per million (logCPM) are shown in base 2 log scales. The rows indicate the three orthogonal contrasts, while the columns correspond to the strategies of sampling biological replicates. Colors represent the result of differential expression tests (p &lt; 0.05, after FDR correction for multiple tests). ( e , f , g ) Differentially expressed genes shared by the strategies based on clones and on diverse genotypes. The diagrams represent the number of genes detected as significantly differentially expressed in the contrasts. The strategy based on clones is in blue, while the strategy based on diverse genotypes is in green. The figures represent orthogonal contrasts VLB × HB.LB. VHB ( b , e ), VHB × HB.LB ( c , f ), and HB × LB ( d , g ).

Figure 2 Enriched gene ontology terms by strategy and contrast. There was no significant test result for HB × LB in the strategy based on diverse genotypes (p &lt; 0.01, after FDR adjustment). The numeric axis represents the number of differentially expressed genes for each particular gene ontology term.

differential expression, i.e. , miscalls of up or downregulation, which occurred from 10 -6 to 10 -5 % of genes for the SBC, and from 10 -5 to 10 -4  % for the SBDG. Using the original data results as a gold standard (full set of samples), the strategy based on clones showed a relatively lower percentage of false negatives and a higher percentage of false positives - green and purple curves in (Figure 3), respectively.

Because our systematic removal of samples provided a large number of differential expression tests for each gene, we could establish a high confidence set of DEGs - those with at least 95% of tests with the same results ( Table 2). We then used this high confidence set for performing a functional enrichment analysis (Figure 4, File S4). The enriched GO terms for the full set of DEGs and the high confidence set were essentially different. There were only three enriched terms for the SBDG, of which two had also been detected with the full dataset, and the other was only significant for the SBC. Given the low number of annotated and differentially expressed genes for the contrasts VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB, it was not possible to detect any enriched term for the

Figure 3 Effect of sample removal on the results of differential expression. The values represented by the continuous (SBC) and dashed (SBDG) curves are the averages of differential expression tests for all possible combinations and contrasts, as a function of the number of removed samples. The red curve indicates the concordant genes in the original and subsampled datasets; in yellow, the differentially expressed genes with inverted results, whether up or downregulated; in green, genes that were not significant due to subsampling; in blue, filtered genes after subsampling; and in purple, genes that appeared as spuriously differentially expressed with subsampling.

Table 2 The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the high confidence set. We identified these genes as differentially expressed in at least 95% of the subsampling combinations when removing from one to four samples in each strategy. We considered only the combinations which presented a minimum of two samples per experimental group. For each strategy, we show the total number of DEGs and those annotated with gene ontology terms.

|                 | SBC DEGs   | SBC DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   |
|-----------------|------------|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Contrast        | Total      | Annotated  | Total       | Annotated   |
| VLB × VHB.HB.LB | 14240      | 2688       | 2960        | 458         |
| VHB × HB.LB     | 5774       | 829        | 44          | 7           |
| HB × LB         | 5371       | 994        | 34          | 7           |

SBDG. Analyzing exclusively the SBC, nearly 73% of the terms were also enriched in the full dataset for VLB x VHB. HB.LB, 50% for VHB x HB.LB and 75% for HB x LB. Also, the  number of enriched terms was high, even with fewer DEGs for the test. Some terms were exclusive for the high confidence set, such as zinc ion binding, proteolysis, and negative regulation of translation. The opposite also occurred, such as for kinase activity.

## Supplementary material

The following online material is available for this article:

Table S1 - Processing of sequencing data.

Table S2 - Summary statistics of the de novo transcriptome assembly and its annotation with Gene Ontology terms.

Figure S1 - Number of genes kept after filtering out lowly expressed genes.

Figure S2 - Cumulative distribution of identified mismatches.

Figure S3 - Correspondence between differentially expressed genes found by SBC and SBDG per contrast and number of removed samples.

File S1 - Differential gene expression results.

File S2 - List of annotated genes in the transcriptome.

File S3 - Gene Ontology enrichment results.

File S4 - Gene Ontology enrichment for the high confidence set.

Associate Editor: Rogério Margis

License information: This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (type CC-BY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original article is properly cited.
DATA AVAILABILITY
## Comparison of differential expression results with the full dataset

For differential expression analyses, we initially excluded lowly expressed genes, by filtering out genes that did not show a CPM greater than one for at least three samples. We did this filtering individually for each strategy, resulting in different sets of filtered genes for SBC and SBDG. Next, the following steps were repeated with the same criteria for both strategies, using the edgeR package (Robinson et al., 2010). We normalized the gene counts with the trimmed mean of

M-values method (Robinson and Oshlack , 2010) and built MDS (Multidimensional scaling) plots using the top 2,000 genes with the greatest pairwise variation between samples.

For  statistical  tests  of  differential  expression,  we considered a model for gene counts parametrized as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for sample i in an experimental group, gene g , π g,i the fraction of gene counts per gene and sample, dispersion Φ g , libraries size N i , average counts µ g,i = N i π g,i , and variance Φ g = π g,i ( 1+π g,i Φ g ). The common dispersion is the squared Biological Coefficient of Variation (BCV), which considers the common dispersion from all genes. The use of a local regression of genewise dispersion provides an additional level of information for dispersion estimates for each gene. As a result, Φ g represents a compromise between the dispersion of counts for gene g and the borrowed genewise dispersion from genes with close average CPM.

3 2 We designed three orthogonal contrasts to test for differential expression for each gene, namely VLB × VHB. HB.LB, corresponding to the null hypothesis H 0 :π g,VLB = π g,VHB +  π g,HB +  π g,LB  , VHB × HB.LB  to H 0 :π g,VHB = π g,HB + π g,LB , and HB × LB to H 0 :π g,HB = π g,LB .   A likelihood  ratio test was performed for each combination of gene, contrast, and strategy to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), with p-values adjusted by the false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) at a 0.05 significance threshold.

Using the sets of DEGs and the annotated transcriptome, we performed functional enrichment analyses considering the frequency of Gene Ontology (GO) terms in the background reference and each set. Because the average gene length may vary among GO categories, care was taken to calculate effective gene lengths, based on the average length of genes in each sample weighted by their expression levels. We used the goseq package (Young et al., 2010) to perform the functional enrichment test for each represented GO term (p &lt; 0.01, after adjusting for multiple tests with the FDR approach).

## Code and data availability

All the scripts are available at the Github repository (github.com/victor-h14/BiologicalReplicates). The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB44302 for SBDG and PRJEB40481 for SBC.
| Group   | Genotype          |   # of samples in SBC |   # of samples in SBDG | Soluble solids (ºBrix ± s.d.)   |
|---------|-------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|
|         | Krakatau          |                     0 |                      1 | 12.03 ± 2.02                    |
| VLB     | SES205A           |                     0 |                      1 | 13.99 ± 3.14                    |
|         | IN84-58           |                     3 |                      1 | 14.78 ± 1.89                    |
|         | Criolla Rayada    |                     0 |                      1 | 16.53 ± 1.37                    |
| LB      | IJ76-317          |                     0 |                      1 | 17.68 ± 1.75                    |
|         | F36-819           |                     3 |                      1 | 18.05 ± 1.51                    |
|         | White Transparent |                     0 |                      1 | 19.60 ± 2.01                    |
| HB      | RB92579           |                     0 |                      1 | 19.77 ± 1.29                    |
|         | R570              |                     3 |                      1 | 20.69 ± 1.24                    |
|         | White Mauritius   |                     0 |                      1 | 21.25 ± 1.38                    |
| VHB     | SP80-3280         |                     3 |                      1 | 21.29 ± 1.88                    |
|         | RB835486          |                     0 |                      1 | 21.85 ± 1.86                    |

|                 | SBC DEGs   | SBC DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   |
|-----------------|------------|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Contrast        | Total      | Annotated  | Total       | Annotated   |
| VLB × VHB.HB.LB | 14240      | 2688       | 2960        | 458         |
| VHB × HB.LB     | 5774       | 829        | 44          | 7           |
| HB × LB         | 5371       | 994        | 34          | 7           |

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 16:48:19,409 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 16:48:19,411 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 16:48:19,411 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 16:48:19,412 - INFO - {"entries": [
    {
        "accession": "PRJEB44302",
        "accession_type": "BioProject",
        "organism": null,
        "genotype": "SBDG",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "data availability statement",
        "evidence_text": "The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB44302 for SBDG"
    },
    {
        "accession": "PRJEB40481",
        "accession_type": "BioProject",
        "organism": null,
        "genotype": "SBC",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "data availability statement",
        "evidence_text": "The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB40481 for SBC"
    }
],
"notes": "No organism information was provided in the text. The genotypes mentioned (SBDG and SBC) seem to refer to the sampling strategies rather than specific genotypes of an organism."}
2025-10-28 16:48:19,412 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJNA723681/10.1186_s12870-022-03440-z.json

2025-10-28 16:48:19,456 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.1186_s12870-022-03440-z.json (Title: Interspecific complementation-...)
2025-10-28 16:48:19,456 - INFO - Characters: 37429
2025-10-28 16:48:19,456 - INFO - Words (approx): 5823
2025-10-28 16:48:19,457 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 7569.900000000001
2025-10-28 16:48:19,457 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 16:48:19,457 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 16:48:19,457 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        FULL TEXT
Background In plants, different tissues and organs are produced in a specific pattern during embryonic and post-embryonic developments [ 1 ]. Shoot apical meristem (SAM) mainly constitutes the vegetative and floral meristem. Unlimited (or indeterminate) growth in vegetative tissues produces leaves and axillary branches at the nodes, whereas the limited (or determinate) growth is marked by the floral meristem where the SAM partitions its cells to divide in a highly coordinated manner to give rise to different floral parts [ 2 ]. The spatiotemporal differentiation of shoot apical cells forms specific patterns of meristems, initiated under tight regulation of boundary cells [ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 – 9 ]. The regulatory network constitutes combinatory action of several elements, including transcription factors (TFs) [ 10 ]. The NAC transcription factors belong to one of the most prominent families of plant-specific TFs, constituting more than 100 members in Arabidopsis [ 11 ]. NACs derived their name from NAM ( NO APICAL MERISTEM ), ATAF 1/2 (Arabidopsis
transcription activation factor) and CUC ( CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON ) [ 12 , 13 – 14 ]. The members of NAC transcription factors, including CUC in Arabidopsis, NAM in Petunia hybrida and CUPULIFORMIS (CUP) in Antirrhinum majus , are responsible for boundary cell formation [ 1 , 15 , 16 ]. In Arabidopsis , three CUC genes, CUC1, CUC2 and CUC3 , are reported. CUC1 and CUC2 have diverged from each other through duplication event from a common ancestor. CUC2 defines the shoot apical meristem zone, whereas CUC3 marks the boundary layer around developing organs. In general, primary shoot meristem development depends on CUCs activity, and axillary meristem requires mainly CUC2 and CUC3. Mutants of CUC genes revealed various exclusive and partially overlapping phenotypes in different plant development processes such as SAM establishment, lateral organ separation, leaf serration, and ovule formation [ 1 , 17 , 18 – 19 ]. These mutant phenotypes suggest that CUCs are necessary for normal ovule development and CUCs have higher expression in sporogenous tissue of ovule [ 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 – 31 ]. The low expression of CUC s decreases the number of leaflets causing fewer serrated leaves [ 10 , 18 , 32 , 33 – 34 ]. The expression pattern of CUC s is often synchronous and redundant in many cases; therefore, it becomes difficult to recognize a single knockout mutation. For example, defects in shoot apical meristem and cotyledon shapes can only be detectable under double and triple mutation of CUCs in Arabidopsis [ 17 ]. Previous findings indicate that Arabidopsis CUC1 , CUC2 and rice CUC1 are post-transcriptionally targeted by miR164 [ 18 , 35 , 36 ]. This regulatory mechanism controls the balance between tissue separation/fusion and plays essential roles during leaf serration, phyllotaxy and growth [ 18 , 37 ]. Consistently, the plants display pronounced serrations, extra petals, and enlarged boundary domains when they express a miR164-resistant version of CUC1 or CUC2 [ 35 ]. Intriguingly, the role of the miR164-CUC module in the regulation of leaf and floral organ morphology seems conserved across species [ 19 , 37 ]. Besides miRNA, CUC gene expression is also reported to be regulated by chromatin remodeling [ 38 ]. Two SWI/SNF ATPases, AtBRM and SYD, are necessary for cotyledon separation in Arabidopsis by modulating the expression of CUC genes [ 38 ]. Saccharum spp. (sugarcane), a tropical grass belonging to the family Poaceae is cultivated worldwide as a crop for sugar and biofuel feedstock. Sugarcane provides approximately 80% of sugar and 40% of bioethanol [ 39 ]. In terms of tonnage, it is the most cultivated crop than other staple crops (rice and wheat) (FAO, UN). Generally, the commercial cultivars are planted using stem cuttings with approximately 3-4 axillary buds that form primary shoots and roots after planting [ 40 ]. Due to the increasing demand for biofuel, researchers are putting continuous effort into improving sugarcane varieties for more sugar content while maintaining their hardiness. Recently, the sugarcane genome, one of the most complex genomes among all the crops, has been published, allowing researchers to study and improve the commercial varieties [ 41 ]. Here, we performed a genome-wide identification and expression analysis of CUC genes from sugarcane to classify and better understand their functions. We found two CUC , SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 genes, in the sugarcane genome with unique expression patterns. We also found that the expression level of SsCUC2 is regulated by miR164, which could be essential for sugarcane ovule development. Besides, we discovered that SsCUC2 could complement the cotyledon fusion and axillary meristem defects of the Arabidopsis cuc2cuc3 mutant. Despite the divergence of monocots and eudicots during evolution, the complementation of CUC2 from sugarcane (monocot) in Arabidopsis (eudicot) suggests a conserved role of Ss CUC2. Our results indicate that SsCUCs play a central role in sugarcane development, and miR164-SsCUC2 module could be essential for sugarcane ovule development. Results Identification of the CUC genes in S. spontaneum A total of five sugarcane CUC gene sequences (three CUC2 alleles and two CUC3 alleles) were identified in the S. spontaneum genome (Table 1 ). The distribution of these SsCUC genes was on chromosomes 6 and 7. The SsCUC proteins were 311-401 amino acid (aa) residues in length, where CUC2 alleles had 397, 400 and 401 aa residues, and CUC3 alleles were with 311 and 331 aa residues, respectively (Table 1 ). The molecular weight (MW) for the SsCUC proteins ranged from 34.198 kDa to 42.251 kDa, and their isoelectric points (pI) varied from 7.22 to 9.03. Additional parameters for sugarcane SsCUC proteins such as subcellular locations, N-glycosylation sites, and phosphorylation sites have also been predicted in this study. Based on the previous reports, the SsCUC proteins were expected for their localization in the nucleus, suggesting that they participate in gene expression regulation [ 42 ]. Interestingly, N-glycosylation sites were not present in SsCUC2, whereas both the SsCUC3 had one N-glycosylation site at their C terminal end. Although both SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 had phosphorylation sites in the NAM domain, SsCUC2 possessed extra phosphorylation sites in the NAM domain. Besides, SsCUC3 did not own any phosphorylation sites outside the NAM domain whereas, SsCUC2 had 2 to 3 extra phosphorylation sites outside the NAM domain in the C-terminal region (Table -1, Additional File S 1 ). Table 1 The physicochemical properties of CUC sequences in S. spontaneum and Arabidopsis thaliana Name Gene ID A B C Amino acid length (aa) MW (kDa) Isoelectric point Chromosome position 1 SsCUC2 Sspon.07G0020380-1A 0 4 2 401 42.251 8.76 Chr7A:75915862-75918375 2 SsCUC2 Sspon.07G0020380-2C 0 4 2 400 42.107 8.9 Chr7C:70928956-70931222 3 SsCUC2 Sspon.07G0020380-3D 0 4 3 397 41.452 9.03 Chr7D:67919120-67921641 4 SsCUC3 Sspon.06g0001780-1A 1 3 0 331 36.215 7.22 Chr6A:5729607-5731660 5 SsCUC3 Sspon.06g0001780-2B 1 3 0 311 34.198 8.52 Chr6B:3987180-3989885 6 AtCUC1 AT3G15170 3 4 1 310 34.232 8.58 Chr3:5109782-5111608 7 AtCUC2 AT5G53950 3 5 2 375 41.434 8.52 Chr5:21901704-21903854 8 AtCUC3 AT1G76420 3 3 3 334 38.017 6.46 Chr1:28671806-28674045 note: ‘A’ represents the number of N-Glycosylation site ‘B’ represents the number of Protein kinase C phosphorylation site in the NAM domain of the protein ‘C’ represents the number of Protein kinase C phosphorylation site outside the NAM domain of the protein Alleles are labeled with –nX, where n represents alleles and X indicates haplotype ID, ranging from A to D Gene structure and motif composition of CUC genes The intron/exon organization and conserved motifs of the CUC genes from selected monocots and eudicots, including S. spontaneum , were studied to explore the structural features of CUC genes and proteins encoded by the CUC genes. We identified ten different motifs in CUC proteins (Fig. 1 ). Among the 10 identified motifs, SsCUC2 had 8 motifs and SsCUC3 only had 6 motifs. Motif no. 8 and 10 were not present in the SsCUC2 whereas, motifs 6, 7, 8 and 9 were absent from SsCUC3 (Fig. 1 ). All the CUC3 proteins except SlCUC3 had motif 10, indicating that it could be CUC3 proteins specific motif. Motifs 7 and 9 were specific to CUC1 and CUC2 (Fig. 1 ). Motifs 1 to 5 were present in all the selected CUC proteins and represented the NAM domain. Fig. 1 Schematic diagram representing the architecture and motif composition CUC genes in 6 monocots (Ss- Saccharum spontaneum, Ac-Ananas comosus, Os-Oryza sativa, Bd-Brachypodium distachyon, Hv-Hordeum vulgare and Zm-Zea mays) and 9 eudicots (At-Arabidopsis thaliana, Br-Brassica rapa, Dc-Daucus carota, Sl-Solanum lycopersicum, Eg-Eucalyptus grandis, Cs-Citrus sinensis, Gr-Gossypium raimondi, Gm-Glycine max and Pv-Phaseolus vulgaris ). The motifs, numbers 1–10, are displayed in different colored boxes and detailed below The exon-intron organization of all of these CUC genes was scanned to gain more insights into the CUC gene evolution. In general, the CUC genes were intron-poor, and the number of introns varied from 1 to 3 for them. All the selected CUC1 genes contained two introns, and most of the CUC2 genes also had two introns except for BdCUC2 and OsCUC2 , those possessed only one intron (Fig. 2 ). All the selected monocot CUC3 had only one intron except for the pineapple CUC3 (AcCUC3) , which had two introns indicating an intron gain during evolution. At the same time, all the eudicot CUC3 had two introns except for the Eucalyptus grandis CUC3 (EgCUC3) , which had 3 introns (Fig. 2 ). Additionally, two genes ( AtCUC2 and AtCUC3 ) only had 5’ untranslated region (UTR), and three genes ( SlCUC1 /2 and OsCUC3 ) had only 3’ UTR whereas, 17 genes did not have any UTR. Altogether, these results suggest structural diversity among CUC genes (Fig. 2 ). Fig. 2 Exon-intron structure of sugarcane SsCUC2 , SsCUC3 and their selected homologous genes. Exons are represented as blue boxes, intron as dotted lines, and UTR are represented with black boxes. The different species are indicated as: Ss- Saccharum spontaneum, Ac-Ananas comosus, Os-Oryza sativa, Bd-Brachypodium distachyon, Hv-Hordeum vulgare, Zm-Zea mays, At-Arabidopsis thaliana, Br-Brassica rapa, Dc-Daucus carota, Sl-Solanum lycopersicum, Eg-Eucalyptus grandis, Cs-Citrus sinensis, Gr-Gossypium raimondi, Gm-Glycine max and Pv-Phaseolus vulgaris Phylogenetic analysis of CUC proteins The evolution of CUC orthologs in different plant species was investigated by constructing a phylogenetic tree consisting of 39 CUC proteins from six monocots, including S. spontaneum and nine eudicots using the Neighbor-Joining (NJ) method (Fig. 3 ; Additional File S 2 ). All the monocot CUC proteins were divided into two major groups, where one group represented monocot specific CUC2 and the other group represented monocot specific CUC3 proteins (Fig. 3 ). The eudicot CUC proteins were separated from monocots and grouped along with eudicot-specific CUCs. For example, eudicot CUC3 made a separate group with dicot-specific CUC3 proteins; however, it was still separated from eudicot CUC1 and CUC2 (Fig. 3 ). Fig. 3 The neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree analysis of sugarcane SsCUC2, SsCUC3 and their homologous from 5 monocots ( Ac-Ananas comosus, Os-Oryza sativa, Bd-Brachypodium distachyon, Hv-Hordeum vulgare and Zm-Zea mays) and 9 eudicots (At-Arabidopsis thaliana, Br-Brassica rapa, Dc-Daucus carota, Sl-Solanum lycopersicum, Eg-Eucalyptus grandis, Cs-Citrus sinensis, Gr-Gossypium raimondi, Gm-Glycine max and Pv-Phaseolus vulgaris ). The tree was generated with a bootstrap value of 1000 generated in CLC sequence genomics workbench v12. CUC1 proteins are represented with black color, CUC2 proteins are represented with orange color and CUC3 proteins are represented with pink color. The sequence information of all the proteins used in the analysis is provided in Additional file S 2 SsCUC2 has transcriptional activation ability The NAC family genes are highly conserved in plants, and it is involved in transcriptional regulation of many genes [ 11 ]. We used a GAL4-responsive reporter system to conduct a transient expression assay in yeast cells to verify the transcription activation feature of SsCUC2. Transformed yeast cells with the positive control (pGBKT7-53 + pGADT7-T) and (pGBKT7-SsCUC2) grew well on synthetic dropout medium without tryptophan, histidine and leucine [SD (-Trp/-His/-Leu)] and ensured α-galactosidase (α-gal) activity. Yeast cells with empty pGBKT7 (negative control) exhibited no growth and α-gal activity, indicating that SsCUC2 performs as transcription factors (Fig. 4 A). In addition, to determine the subcellular location of SsCUC2, we used 35 S:SsCUC2-GFP fusion construct and transiently expressed the construct in N. benthamiana leaves. The results showed that SsCUC2 gets localized to the nucleus (Fig. 4 B). Fig. 4 A Transcription activity assay of SsCUC2. The ORF of SsCUC2 was introduced into the yeast expression vector pGBKT7. Yeast cells cotransformed with pGBKT7-53 + pGADT7-T were used as the positive control, and yeast cells with empty vector pGBKT7 were used as a negative control. The yeast cultures harboring respective vectors were grown on the synthetic medium supplied with dextrose (SD) in the absence of Trp (SD/ -T, left panel), on SD medium in the absence of Leu, Trp, and His (SD/ -L -T -H, middle panel) and on SD medium with α-galactosidase and in the absence of Leu, Trp, and His (SD/ -L -T –H + X-α-gal, right panel). Yeast cells were incubated until OD 600 reached 1 and then diluted 10- and 100-fold for assays. B Subcellular localization of SsCUC2 in tobacco epidermal cells (lower panel) The expression of SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 is differentially regulated during sugarcane female gametophyte development Previous research reports have implicated CUC1 and CUC2 in ovule formation and development, besides the mutant of CUC1 and CUC2 results in the reduction of ovule number [ 43 , 44 ]. During ovule development, the expression of CUC genes has been observed in medial, placental tissues and between the region of outgrowing ovules in Arabidopsis [ 44 ]. Therefore we analyzed the RNA-seq from different stages of sugarcane ovule development to study the expression patterns of SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 . Consistent with previous reports, we found the differential expression of SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 during the sugarcane ovule development (Fig. 5 A). The expression of both the SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 increased tremendously at the megaspore mother cell (MMC) stage, which gradually decreased in the meiosis and mitosis stages. The expression of SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 return to approximately basal level at the mature stage of ovule development (Fig. 5 A). The differential expression patterns of SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 indicate that the CUC genes might also regulate the sugarcane ovule development. Fig. 5 Expression and regulation of sugarcane CUC genes. A The expression patterns of SsCUC2 , SsCUC3 and miR164a in different developmental stages of ovules. The expression level for the AC stage was set to 1.0, and the data presented in MMC, Meiosis, Mitosis and Mature is relative to AC. B Predicted target site in SsCUC2 by psRNATarget database. C Target plot (T-plot) indicating the cleavage event mediated by miR164 on the PARE-seq. D RT-qPCR of SsCUC2 , SsCUC3 and miR164a in different developmental stages of ovules. Sugarcane β-actin was used as an internal control. The expression level was set to 1.0 (for AC), and the data presented relative transcript abundance to AC. The threshold cycle (CT) values were used to calculate relative expression using the 2 −ΔΔCT method. The data represent the means ± SE of three replicates, and asterisks denote statistically significant values (**p < 0.01 and *** p < 0.001) miR164a negatively regulates SsCUC2 Previously, it has been demonstrated that miR164 post-transcriptionally regulates the CUC1 and CUC2 [ 18 , 36 , 45 ]. Therefore, we first checked whether SsCUC2 ( the orthologous gene of CUC1 and CUC2 ) expression is regulated by microRNA. Consequently, we investigated the corresponding miRNA using SsCUC2 as a target in the psRNATarget database ( http://plantgrn.noble.org/psRNATarget/home ) [ 46 ]. The results indicated that the microRNA miR164a might regulate SsCUC2 (Fig. 5 B), which could also be regulating SsCUC2 during ovule development. Hence we checked the expression of miR164a in sRNA-seq from different stages of sugarcane ovule development. The sRNA-seq result suggested that the sugarcane miR164a was differentially accumulated in the developing sugarcane ovule (Fig. 5 A). The expression pattern of miR164a was initially decreased in the MMC stage and gradually increased in meiosis and mitosis stages, but the expression of miR164 exponentially increased at the mature stage (Fig. 5 A). The expression pattern of miR164a in developing ovules endorses that it could be regulating the SsCUC2 expression during ovule development. We further confirmed that miRNA164a cleaves the SsCUC2 using the PARE-seq generated (Fig. 5 C). We then checked the consistency of deep sequencing and validated the results using RT-qPCR. RT-qPCR results showed a similar trend to that of the sequencing data (Fig. 5 D). SsCUC2 has a conserved function in meristem/organ boundary specification In arabidopsis, the double mutants of the CUC gene show defects in SAM formation and form cup-shaped cotyledon due to the fusion of cotyledons. However, the single mutants of any CUC genes have no significant boundary formation defects [ 1 ] (Additional File S 3 ). To investigate the conserved function of CUC genes and check whether the SsCUC2 can rescue the phenotypic defects of cuc2cuc3 mutant, we ectopically expressed the SsCUC2 in the Arabidopsis cuc2cuc3 mutant. During the transgenic screening on the hygromycin-based selection, we found that the plants carrying the sugarcane CUC2 gene grew bigger with two separate cotyledons and complemented the cup phenotype of cuc2cuc3 mutant (Fig. 6 A and 6 B). The complemented lines (com1 and com2) showed normal plant growth with no SAM defects and two separate cotyledons in the next generation. These complemented plants showed a complete rescue of mutant phenotype during early vegetative and reproductive growth stages (Fig. 6 C and D). Taken together, the results presented here suggest Ss CUC2 has a conserved role in boundary formation and early SAM formation. Fig. 6 Functional characterization of sugarcane CUC2 gene. A&B) Hygromycin-based screening of T1 transgenic plants. The plants carrying the SsCUC2 gene show normal two separate cotyledons (marked with white arrows), whereas the non-transformed with the cup-shaped fused cotyledon. Two complemented T2 lines (Com1 and Com2) showing the rescue of mutant phenotype C) at the early developmental stage with two separate cotyledons D) at the reproductive stage with normal inflorescences Discussion Plant-specific CUC TFs are required for several developmental progressions, such as establishing boundaries, the emergence of leaf primordia from apical meristem, floral organ separation, etc. [ 1 , 10 , 15 , 47 ]. However, the CUC genes have not been functionally characterized in monocots except in rice [ 48 ]. In this study, the CUC genes from sugarcane were studied in detail. The identified SsCUC genes were distributed on Chromosomes 7 A, 7 C, 7D (for SsCUC2 ), 6 A and 6B (for SsCUC3 ). There is enough evidence to suggest that exon-intron structure variation is critical for the evolution of gene families. The gain and loss of exon-introns are caused by the reorganization and combination of different chromosome fragments [ 49 ]. The exon-intron organization study of the sugarcane CUC genes and CUC genes for 5 monocots and 6 eudicots indicated that CUC genes are intron poor. Generally, the gene belonging to the same group shared similar intron-exon patterns with few exceptions (Fig. 2 ). The similarities and differences among gene family proteins could be reflected in the composition of motifs [ 50 ]. The study of motifs present in CUC2 and CUC3 protein from different monocot and eudicot species revealed that most CUC2 proteins possess additional motifs compared to CUC3 (Fig. 1 ). Also, proper protein folding, activity and secretion of many proteins require N-glycosylation, a common post-translational modification of proteins in eukaryotes. N-linked glycans are processed in the ER by α glucosidases I and II and modified in the Golgi apparatus into complex structures [ 51 , 52 – 53 ]. Interestingly, among the five identified CUC sequences of sugarcane, only SsCUC3 sequences possessed an N-glycosylation site at the C-terminal region. Also, there were extra protein phosphorylation sites in SsCUC2 compared to SsCUC3 in the NAM domain and in the N-terminal region (Table 1 , Additional file 1 ). Both the N-linked glycosylation and protein phosphorylation play a crucial role in the activity of the protein. These differences between SsCUC2 and SsCUC3 could be the origin of the difference between their function and regulation. Previous investigations of the evolutionary origin of CUC proteins suggest that the diversification of CUC3 from the CUC1/ CUC2 occurred more than 150 million years ago [ 54 , 55 ]. Hasson et al. (2011) suggested that CUC2 may have preserved much of the inherited function after duplication of an ancestral gene, whereas CUC1 may have diverged, with changes affecting both the regulatory and coding regions of the gene [ 10 ]. We reconstructed the CUC phylogeny to investigate the evolutionary differences between the sugarcane CUC proteins and selected monocots and eudicot CUC proteins. Consistent with previous reports, the eudicot CUC formed two different clades, one with CUC1/CUC2 and another with CUC3. The monocot and eudicot sequences were also settled separately in the phylogeny (Fig. 3 ). The ovule in seed plants forms the female gametophyte, which is responsible for fertilization and seed development. The primordia of the ovule comprise three separate regions. In Arabidopsis , CUCs have been linked to ovule initiation, ovule number, and ovule individualization [ 43 , 44 , 56 , 57 ]. Previously, CUC transcripts were detected at the boundaries between the chalazal region, nucellus, and ovules [ 20 ]. In the RNA-seq of sugarcane, we also noticed the differential expression of CUCs during different developmental stages of the ovule. During the initial stages of ovule development, the expression of SsCUC genes increased several folds and gradually decreased, returning to the basal levels at ovule maturation (Fig. 5 A and D). These observations indicate that SsCUC genes participate in ovule development, which is in agreement with the previously reported functions of the CUC gene [ 20 , 43 , 56 , 57 ]. In general, miRNAs function as negative regulators of the genes that act post-transcriptionally [ 58 , 59 ]. Several NAC genes are also targeted by miRNAs that regulate their expression, including NAM proteins of many gymnosperms that possess characteristic miR164 binding sites [ 19 ]. MIR164 regulates floral organ number and boundary development by creating and controlling the boundary domain by post-transcriptionally regulating CUC1 and CUC2 [ 35 , 45 ]. In Arabidopsis, miR164-CUC2 module activity in the meristem tightly regulates plant development [ 36 , 60 , 61 ]. Mutations in the OsNAM, rice orthologous gene of CUC1 and CUC2, display a small phenotype with fused leaf structure, small panicles, and defective floral organs [ 48 ]. Also, overexpression of OsmiR164b displays a phenotype similar to OsNAM, and the OsmiR164-resistant version of OsNAM shows altered expression in the meristem, indicating that the OsNAM expression is regulated by OsmiR164 [ 36 ]. We also identified the miR164 binding site in sugarcane SsCUC2 using bioinformatics and PARE-seq data. Our results show that SsCUC2 possesses a miR164a binding site suggesting that the expression of sugarcane CUC2 is also regulated by miR164a (Fig. 5 B C). Since CUCs have redundant functions in Arabidopsis , a single mutation does not induce an extreme phenotype, but the double mutation prevents the development of embryonic shoot meristems (Additional File S 3 ) [ 1 , 19 ]. We verified the conserved function of the SsCUC2 gene by complementing the Arabidopsis cuc2cuc3 mutant phenotype using SsCUC2 . The complemented plants rescued the cup phenotype of cuc2cuc3 mutant and distinctive SAM growth and floral architecture (Fig. 6 C & D), suggesting that SsCUC2 has similar biological functions to AtCUC2. Conclusions Here we studied CUC genes in the sugarcane and explored their regulation during sugarcane ovule development. We also identified the conserved function of SsCUC2 in boundary formation and SAM development by ectopically expressing SsCUC2 in the Arabidopsis cuc2cuc3 mutant. Taken together, this study provides essential information about the conserved functions of the SsCUC2, especially in boundary formation and in ovule development, which is a critical trait in crop breeding. Methods Plant materials and growth condition and treatments Sugarcane ( Saccharum officinarum L.) cultivar Yuetang 91-976 samples were collected from State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-Bioresources, Guangxi, Nanning, China. DIC observation of the different stages of developing ovule [Archesporial cell (AC), MMC, meiosis, mitosis, and mature] was carried out to establish the developing stages in the sugarcane inflorescence, followed by sample collection for each stage using micro-dissection needles. All samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in a deep freezer at -80 °C for subsequent RNA extraction. The Arabidopsis thaliana (Col-0; CS60000) was used as the wild-type, and all plants used were in Columbia background throughout this study. T-DNA mutants of cuc2-3, cuc3-105 and cuc2-3cuc3-105 were kindly provided by Dr. Nicolas Arnaud (INRA-AgroParisTech, France). Surface sterilized Arabidopsis seeds were placed in round, 90 mm Petri-plates on the modified Hoagland’s medium containing 1% (w/v) sucrose and 1% (w/v) agar as described previously [ 59 ]. The plates were kept at 4 °C in the dark for 2 days for seed stratification. After stratification, the plates were transferred to the growth room at 22 °C with a 16 h light/8 h dark photoperiod under an intensity of 100 µmol m −2 s −1, and seedlings were grown vertically [ 62 ]. For Arabidopsis transformation, Agrobacterium -mediated floral dip method was performed [ 63 ], and transgenic plants were selected on media plates containing 50 mg l −1 hygromycin. Identification of CUC genes The sugarcane (S. spontaneum) AP85–441 genome sequence data was downloaded from http://www.life.illinois.edu/ming/downloads/Spontaneum_genome [ 41 ]. We searched CUC genes from the Saccharum genome using BLAST-P with the e-value set 0.01 with Arabidopsis CUC genes as the query. The identified sequences were further verified, and redundant sequences were removed. Besides, the CUC genes from 5 monocots ( Ananas comosus , Oryza sativa , Brachypodium distachyon , Hordeum vulgare and Zea mays ) and nine eudicots ( Arabidopsis thaliana , Brassica rapa , Daucus carota , Solanum lycopersicum , Eucalyptus grandis , Citrus sinensis , Gossypium Raimondi , Glycine max , and Phaseolus vulgaris ) were obtained from Phytozome V12.1 ( https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov ) and NCBI (Additional file S 2 ). Phylogenetic analysis The phylogenetic relationship of CUCs was studied using peptide sequences retrieved from monocots and eudicot plants listed above. The multiple sequence alignments were performed using MUSCLE, and the phylogenetic tree was constructed by CLC Genomics Workbench v12.0 (CLC Bio, Aarhus, Denmark) using the Neighbor-Joining method with default parameters and the bootstrap test of1000 replicates. Gene structure analysis and conserved Motif Identification The schematic CUC s structures were drawn by the Gene Structure Display Server 2.0 ( http://gsds.gao-lab.org ) [ 64 ]. The conserved motifs in the CUCs were identified by MEME (Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation) server 5.3.3 ( https://meme-suite.org/meme ) using default parameters with the maximum number of motifs set at 10, and the optimal width of each motif was set between 6 and 100 residues. RNA-Seq, small RNA, and PARE-seq analysis RNA was extracted from the samples collected at different developmental stages of the ovule (AC, MMC, meiosis, mitosis, and mature) of the sugarcane. Ten mRNA-seq libraries, 10 small RNA-seq libraries (two replicate for each stage of developing ovule) and 5 degradome libraries were constructed (one replicate for each stage of ovule). Library construction and high-throughput RNA-seq, sRNA-seq, and PARE-seq were performed by LC Sciences (Zhejiang, China). After sequencing, the raw reads were filtered, and adapter sequences were removed along with contamination and low-quality reads from raw reads. The remaining unique sequences (clean reads) were then processed for further analysis. The transcript abundance of sugarcane CUC genes and miR164 was calculated as per million reads (RPM) method using CLC Genomics Workbench v12.0 (CLC Bio, Aarhus, Denmark). The heatmap was generated using TBtools after converting the expression values in fold change (additional file S 4 ). RT-qPCR and expression analysis Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, MD, USA), followed by DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) treatment. First-strand cDNA synthesis was carried out using 1ug of total RNA using ThermoScript RT-PCR kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA). In a CFX96 qPCR system (Bio-Rad, Singapore), quantitative PCR was performed with FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green I master mix (Takara, Shiga, Japan). Using 2 −ΔΔCT method fold change in the expression was determined using the β-actin gene as the internal control. For miRNA, stem-loop qPCR was performed the reaction cycles were the same as with mRNA analysis. Three biological replicates and at least three separate technical replicates were used for each stage. Additional file S 5 contains a list of the primers used in this study. Vector constructs The Ss CUC2-GFP was generated by amplifying the coding sequence of Ss CUC2 (Sspon.07G0020380-1 A) without the stop codon from sugarcane leaf cDNA using the primers listed in additional file S 5 . The amplified PCR fragment was then cloned into the pENTR/D-TOPO vector (Invitrogen). pENTR/D-TOPO clones were then recombined into the destination vector pGWB505 using LR Clonase II (Invitrogen), and the construct was confirmed by sequencing. Transcriptional activation analysis in yeast cells The Ss CUC2 ORF was cloned into pGBKT7 to generate pGBKT7- Ss CUC2 using the primers listed in additional file S 5 . The yeast strain AH109 was then transformed with pGBKT7, pGBKT7-53 + pGADT7-T, and pGBKT7- Ss CUC2. The transformed yeast cells were grown on SD (-Trp), SD (-Trp/-His/-Ade), and SD (-Trp/-His/-Ade/α-gal). The growth status and α-gal activity discovered the transactivation activity of Ss CUC.
METHODS
. Methods Plant materials and growth condition and treatments Sugarcane ( Saccharum officinarum L.) cultivar Yuetang 91-976 samples were collected from State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-Bioresources, Guangxi, Nanning, China. DIC observation of the different stages of developing ovule [Archesporial cell (AC), MMC, meiosis, mitosis, and mature] was carried out to establish the developing stages in the sugarcane inflorescence, followed by sample collection for each stage using micro-dissection needles. All samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in a deep freezer at -80 °C for subsequent RNA extraction. The Arabidopsis thaliana (Col-0; CS60000) was used as the wild-type, and all plants used were in Columbia background throughout this study. T-DNA mutants of cuc2-3, cuc3-105 and cuc2-3cuc3-105 were kindly provided by Dr. Nicolas Arnaud (INRA-AgroParisTech, France). Surface sterilized Arabidopsis seeds were placed in round, 90 mm Petri-plates on the modified Hoagland’s medium containing 1% (w/v) sucrose and 1% (w/v) agar as described previously [ 59 ]. The plates were kept at 4 °C in the dark for 2 days for seed stratification. After stratification, the plates were transferred to the growth room at 22 °C with a 16 h light/8 h dark photoperiod under an intensity of 100 µmol m −2 s −1, and seedlings were grown vertically [ 62 ]. For Arabidopsis transformation, Agrobacterium -mediated floral dip method was performed [ 63 ], and transgenic plants were selected on media plates containing 50 mg l −1 hygromycin. Identification of CUC genes The sugarcane (S. spontaneum) AP85–441 genome sequence data was downloaded from http://www.life.illinois.edu/ming/downloads/Spontaneum_genome [ 41 ]. We searched CUC genes from the Saccharum genome using BLAST-P with the e-value set 0.01 with Arabidopsis CUC genes as the query. The identified sequences were further verified, and redundant sequences were removed. Besides, the CUC genes from 5 monocots ( Ananas comosus , Oryza sativa , Brachypodium distachyon , Hordeum vulgare and Zea mays ) and nine eudicots ( Arabidopsis thaliana , Brassica rapa , Daucus carota , Solanum lycopersicum , Eucalyptus grandis , Citrus sinensis , Gossypium Raimondi , Glycine max , and Phaseolus vulgaris ) were obtained from Phytozome V12.1 ( https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov ) and NCBI (Additional file S 2 ). Phylogenetic analysis The phylogenetic relationship of CUCs was studied using peptide sequences retrieved from monocots and eudicot plants listed above. The multiple sequence alignments were performed using MUSCLE, and the phylogenetic tree was constructed by CLC Genomics Workbench v12.0 (CLC Bio, Aarhus, Denmark) using the Neighbor-Joining method with default parameters and the bootstrap test of1000 replicates. Gene structure analysis and conserved Motif Identification The schematic CUC s structures were drawn by the Gene Structure Display Server 2.0 ( http://gsds.gao-lab.org ) [ 64 ]. The conserved motifs in the CUCs were identified by MEME (Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation) server 5.3.3 ( https://meme-suite.org/meme ) using default parameters with the maximum number of motifs set at 10, and the optimal width of each motif was set between 6 and 100 residues. RNA-Seq, small RNA, and PARE-seq analysis RNA was extracted from the samples collected at different developmental stages of the ovule (AC, MMC, meiosis, mitosis, and mature) of the sugarcane. Ten mRNA-seq libraries, 10 small RNA-seq libraries (two replicate for each stage of developing ovule) and 5 degradome libraries were constructed (one replicate for each stage of ovule)

. Library construction and high-throughput RNA-seq, sRNA-seq, and PARE-seq were performed by LC Sciences (Zhejiang, China). After sequencing, the raw reads were filtered, and adapter sequences were removed along with contamination and low-quality reads from raw reads. The remaining unique sequences (clean reads) were then processed for further analysis. The transcript abundance of sugarcane CUC genes and miR164 was calculated as per million reads (RPM) method using CLC Genomics Workbench v12.0 (CLC Bio, Aarhus, Denmark). The heatmap was generated using TBtools after converting the expression values in fold change (additional file S 4 ). RT-qPCR and expression analysis Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, MD, USA), followed by DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) treatment. First-strand cDNA synthesis was carried out using 1ug of total RNA using ThermoScript RT-PCR kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA). In a CFX96 qPCR system (Bio-Rad, Singapore), quantitative PCR was performed with FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green I master mix (Takara, Shiga, Japan). Using 2 −ΔΔCT method fold change in the expression was determined using the β-actin gene as the internal control. For miRNA, stem-loop qPCR was performed the reaction cycles were the same as with mRNA analysis. Three biological replicates and at least three separate technical replicates were used for each stage
DATA AVAILABILITY
. Additional file S 5 contains a list of the primers used in this study. Vector constructs The Ss CUC2-GFP was generated by amplifying the coding sequence of Ss CUC2 (Sspon.07G0020380-1 A) without the stop codon from sugarcane leaf cDNA using the primers listed in additional file S 5 . The amplified PCR fragment was then cloned into the pENTR/D-TOPO vector (Invitrogen). pENTR/D-TOPO clones were then recombined into the destination vector pGWB505 using LR Clonase II (Invitrogen), and the construct was confirmed by sequencing. Transcriptional activation analysis in yeast cells The Ss CUC2 ORF was cloned into pGBKT7 to generate pGBKT7- Ss CUC2 using the primers listed in additional file S 5 . The yeast strain AH109 was then transformed with pGBKT7, pGBKT7-53 + pGADT7-T, and pGBKT7- Ss CUC2. The transformed yeast cells were grown on SD (-Trp), SD (-Trp/-His/-Ade), and SD (-Trp/-His/-Ade/α-gal). The growth status and α-gal activity discovered the transactivation activity of Ss CUC.
        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 16:50:39,949 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 16:50:39,951 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 16:50:39,951 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 16:50:39,951 - INFO - {"entries": [
    {
        "accession": "Sspon.07G0020380-1",
        "accession_type": "GenBank",
        "organism": "Saccharum officinarum",
        "genotype": "Yuetang 91-976",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "main text",
        "evidence_text": null
    },
    {
        "accession": "CS60000",
        "accession_type": "Other",
        "organism": "Arabidopsis thaliana",
        "genotype": "Col-0",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "main text",
        "evidence_text": null
    }
],
"notes": "The accession numbers and organism information were extracted from the main text. The genotype information was also extracted from the main text. The confidence level is high because the information is directly stated in the article."}
2025-10-28 16:50:39,951 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJNA723681/10.1186_s12864-021-08090-3.json

2025-10-28 16:50:39,998 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.1186_s12864-021-08090-3.json (Title: Genomic analysis of SBP gene f...)
2025-10-28 16:50:39,998 - INFO - Characters: 39485
2025-10-28 16:50:39,999 - INFO - Words (approx): 6108
2025-10-28 16:50:39,999 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 7940.400000000001
2025-10-28 16:50:39,999 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 16:50:39,999 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 16:50:39,999 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        FULL TEXT
Background Various transcription factors have revealed their critical roles in organism-specific function by activating or suppressing the expression of target genes [ 1 ]. The SQUAMOSA promoter binding (like) proteins (SBPs/SPLs) represent a major family of plant-specific transcription factors. SBPs/SPLs proteins share a highly conserved 76 amino acids in length DNA binding domain, also known as SBP binding domain [ 2 ]. The first SBP/SPL protein was identified in Antirrhinum majus , and this protein could interact with the promoter sequence of the floral meristem gene SQUAMOSA [ 3 ]. As a multigene family, SBP/SPL genes have been characterized from different species ranging from single-cell green algae to multicellular angiosperm [ 4 , 5 ]. There are 16 SBP/SPL genes identified in Arabidopsis [ 6 ], 19 in rice [ 7 ], and 41 in soybean [ 8 ]. SBP transcription factors play central roles in various aspects of plant development including [ 2 , 9 , 10 ], flower development [ 11 ], leaf development [ 12 ], plant hormone signaling transduction [ 13 ], vegetative to reproductive phase transition [ 14 , 15 ]. For example, AtSPL3 participates in regulating flowering under long photoperiod, and constitutively expressed SPL3 shows early flowering [ 6 ]. AtSPL8 is a central regulator involved in the regulation of microsporogenesis and megasporogenesis. spl8 mutant shows pollen sac development defects, and overexpression SPL8 affects plant fertility by GA-dependent signaling pathway [ 16 ]. Moreover, SPL8 and other SPL genes influence gynoecium patterning through mediating auxin homeostasis [ 17 ]. In monocot plants, such as rice and maize, SBP genes are also reported to modulate essential developmental processes. Overexpression of OsSPL14 during the reproductive stage significantly promotes panicle branching and increased grain yield [ 18 ]. OsSPL16 is also a regulator of grain size, shape, and quality [ 19 ]. OsSPL3 regulates crown root development [ 20 ]. For maize, SBP proteins encoding genes, unbranched2 and unbranched3 , affect plant architecture and yield traits by regulating the lateral primordia initiation [ 21 ]. Numerous studies have revealed that many development processes mediated by SBP proteins are closely related to miR156. It is reported that miR156 in Arabidopsis can complementarily bind to the 3′ UTR of SPL3 mRNA, and reduce its expression level through translation repression or transcript cleavage [ 10 , 11 ]. In rice, overexpression of OsmiR156 decreased the expression of SPL genes, indicating the conserved interaction relationship between SPL and miR156 [ 22 ]. Similarly, miR156 targeted OsSPL16 and OsSPL13 control grain shape, size and quality in rice [ 19 , 23 ]. In switchgrass, miR156/SPL4 module controls aerial axillary bud formation and biomass yield [ 24 ]. Sugarcane ( Saccharum spontaneum ), one of the most economically valuable plant, is a perennial tropical or subtropical crop, contributing up to about 80% of sugar production and 40% biofuel feedstock in the world [ 25 ]. Since 2000 years ago, sugarcane has been cultivated as sugar crop in China and India [ 26 ]. This domesticated sugarcane cultivar is a cross between species S. officinarum and S. spontaneum and accounts for the major genome information to modern sugarcane cultivars [ 27 ]. Although the genome information of S. spontaneum L. is available [ 28 ], little progress has been made in sugarcane germplasm improvement through sexual propagation due to the degeneration of sugarcane reproductive organs [ 29 ]. Therefore, unveiling the fundamental mechanism of the sugarcane reproductive developmental process is necessary to develop improved varieties [ 30 ]. Concerning recent findings of SBPs roles in Arabidopsis , rice, and other plants, analysis of SBP gene function in sugarcane will undoubtedly accelerate sugarcane germplasm improvement. In this present study, we systematically analyzed the SBP gene family of sugarcane for their gene structure, phylogeny, motif and domain composition, miR156 target site, and expression pattern in various tissues and organs. Besides, the interaction between the SBP genes and miR156 was critically examined to study their functional relationship during the reproductive stage in sugarcane. Results Identification and characterization of SBP genes in S. spontaneum To identify of SBP genes in sugarcane, the HMM profile of the SBP domain was used as a query to search the sugarcane genome database and BLASTP program. Initially, 66 putative SBP proteins were identified from the sugarcane genome database. All the resulting sequences were further checked by SMART and pfam tools to confirm SBP domain. Sixteen proteins without SBP (Cys-Cys-His-Cys, Zn2) motif or with incomplete SBP domain were removed. Finally, 50 SBP proteins were identified and used for further analysis. Among them, 13 SBP genes had 2, 3 or 4 alleles, including 7 SsSBPs with 2 allelic genes, 5 SsSBPs with 3 allelic genes and 1 SsSBP with 4 allelic genes. We named these SsSBPs as SsSBP1 to SsSBP30 based on their chromosomal locations and added − 1 to − 4 for their alleles (Table 1 ). To futher investigate the conserved status of the SBP domain, 30 SBP protein sequences from sugarcane were aligned to predict conserved domains. The alignment results showed that all SsSBP proteins contained the complete SBP domain and possessed the typical characteristics of SBP domain with two Zinc motifs (Zn1 and Zn2) and one nuclear localization signal (NLS) (Fig. 1 ). Table 1 The characteristics of identified SBP genes in sugarcane Transcript ID Name Chr Genome locations ORF Amino acids MW (kDa) pI GRAVY Group Subcellular localization Sspon.001A0040480 SsSBP1–1 1A 108,429,474–108,435,971 2904 967 105.6349 5.45 −0.303 II Nuclear Sspon.001D0044800 SsSBP1–2 1D 109,076,291–109,081,860 2697 898 98.0265 5.53 − 0.313 II Nuclear Sspon.002A0013930 SsSBP2–1 2A 29,209,489–29,217,185 1644 547 57.0766 9.25 −0.244 VII Nuclear Sspon.002B0011930 SsSBP2–2 2B 28,141,105–28,145,280 1329 442 45.9953 6.53 −0.343 VII Nuclear Sspon.002D0010972 SsSBP2–3 2D 23,780,730–23,784,862 1227 408 42.4603 6.53 −0.354 VII Nuclear Sspon.002A0015030 SsSBP3–1 2A 31,009,987–31,013,034 1179 392 40.9194 9.14 −0.477 VII Nuclear Sspon.002B0012730 SsSBP3–2 2B 29,525,208–29,528,451 1191 396 41.2847 8.98 −0.462 VII Nuclear Sspon.002C0016120 SsSBP3–3 2C 35,044,657–35,076,244 3195 1064 116.0996 7.94 −0.351 VII Nuclear Sspon.002D0011720 SsSBP3–4 2D 25,045,205–25,048,503 1173 390 40.7902 9.04 −0.491 VII Nuclear Sspon.002B0008220 SsSBP4–1 2B 20,690,286–20,695,232 1269 422 42.7577 9.68 −0.315 VI membrane Sspon.002C0010600 SsSBP4–2 2C 22,401,265–22,403,347 576 191 19.3214 9.87 −0.399 VI Nuclear Sspon.002D0015440 SsSBP4–3 2D 33,849,661–33,853,542 723 240 24.4241 10.32 −0.533 VI Nuclear Sspon.002C0010571 SsSBP5 2C 22,345,677–22,347,101 570 189 19.3353 9.96 −0.564 VI Nuclear Sspon.002D0015430 SsSBP6 2D 33,845,362–33,846,340 600 199 20.1822 9.96 −0.512 VI Nuclear Sspon.003A0000410 SsSBP7–1 3A 1,071,412–1,075,547 1185 394 41.3121 9.15 −0.496 VII Nuclear Sspon.003B0003860 SsSBP7–2 3B 7,790,347–7,793,952 1494 497 52.3230 8.94 −0.291 VII Nuclear Sspon.003C0005960 SsSBP7–3 3C 11,433,782–11,437,627 1446 481 51.5591 9.57 −0.44 VII Nuclear Sspon.003A0019770 SsSBP8 3A 50,439,706–50,445,244 2550 849 94.3843 6.22 −0.423 IV Nuclear Sspon.003C0027810 SsSBP9 3C 70,928,512–70,931,044 2604 867 96.6721 7.81 −0.473 IV Nuclear Sspon.004A0021810 SsSBP10–1 4A 62,618,391–62,622,079 768 255 27.6747 8.78 −0.693 V Nuclear Sspon.004B0022500 SsSBP10–2 4B 66,878,517–66,882,065 1152 383 41.8795 8.67 −0.709 V Nuclear Sspon.004A0023470 SsSBP11–1 4A 66,657,938–66,661,498 1458 485 51.7285 9.09 −0.557 V Nuclear Sspon.004D0025580 SsSBP11–2 4D 76,179,579–76,181,404 1077 358 38.8064 9.36 −0.673 V Nuclear Sspon.004A0023540 SsSBP12 4A 66,840,410–66,841,321 1422 473 50.3841 9.01 −0.551 V membrane Sspon.004B0022100 SsSBP13 4B 66,160,113–66,162,260 894 297 31.0155 9.24 −0.16 III Nuclear Sspon.004C0023650 SsSBP14 4C 72,419,102–72,423,304 1314 437 45.6945 7.63 −0.296 III Nuclear Sspon.004D0023290 SsSBP15–1 4D 70,928,686–70,930,879 936 311 32.8608 9.53 −0.295 III Nuclear Sspon.008B0005752 SsSBP15–2 8B 10,803,440–10,806,188 1263 420 44.4747 9.22 −0.588 III Nuclear Sspon.008C0006030 SsSBP15–3 8C 13,386,438–13,389,568 1284 427 45.1796 9.23 −0.583 III Nuclear Sspon.004D0028460 SsSBP16 4D 82,589,080–82,591,351 1260 419 45.7805 9.52 −0.608 V Nuclear Sspon.005A0006871 SsSBP17–1 5A 17,014,877–17,018,085 1185 394 42.8134 7.47 −0.643 III Nuclear Sspon.005D0002360 SsSBP17–2 5D 5,016,047–5,019,246 1191 396 42.8995 7.47 −0.641 III Nuclear Sspon.005A0007540 SsSBP18–1 5A 18,447,549–18,450,470 1203 400 40.9130 9.50 −0.373 VII Nuclear Sspon.005C0003700 SsSBP18–2 5C 9,553,547–9,557,033 1104 367 37.6902 9.48 −0.429 VII Nuclear Sspon.005D0002370 SsSBP19 5D 5,036,183–5,040,905 1191 396 43.2850 7.42 −0.716 III Nuclear Sspon.006A0002670 SsSBP20–1 6A 6,325,351–6,330,604 2856 951 104.3392 7.10 −0.354 II Nuclear Sspon.006D0001140 SsSBP20–2 6D 3,638,437–3,642,110 2298 765 84.0087 8.79 −0.459 II Nuclear Sspon.006A0003761 SsSBP21–1 6A 8,766,368–8,771,945 1410 469 48.7223 8.15 −0.456 VII Nuclear Sspon.006D0002450 SsSBP21–2 6D 6,732,739–6,738,087 1419 472 49.8476 8.62 −0.479 VII Nuclear Sspon.006A0018544 SsSBP22 6A 71,945,300–71,953,194 1065 354 37.6695 9.26 −0.173 VII Nuclear Sspon.006A0019261 SsSBP23 6A 75,415,532–75,423,459 1005 334 35.1004 9.93 −0.328 VII Nuclear Sspon.006B0001500 SsSBP24–1 6B 3,848,048–3,852,283 1248 415 43.1377 8.93 −0.627 VII Nuclear Sspon.006C0001780 SsSBP24–2 6C 4,165,730–4,169,347 1251 416 42.8242 8.87 −0.621 VII Nuclear Sspon.006D0000820 SsSBP24–3 6D 2,918,125–2,922,066 1236 411 42.5089 8.87 −0.627 VII Nuclear Sspon.006C0002070 SsSBP25 6C 4,855,835–4,856,954 897 298 30.4877 9.80 −0.63 II Nuclear Sspon.006D0002410 SsSBP26 6D 6,577,854–6,582,459 726 241 26.0042 8.71 −0.741 VII Nuclear Sspon.007A0010700 SsSBP27 7A 22,289,512–22,304,260 1998 665 72.2692 5.37 −0.438 I Nuclear Sspon.007A0010740 SsSBP28 7A 22,398,323–22,403,566 1311 436 47.2836 5.56 −0.463 I Nuclear Sspon.008B0001960 SsSBP29 8B 2,868,989–2,873,212 1272 423 45.4750 9.32 −0.382 V Nuclear Sspon.ctg0104090 SsSBP30 tig00011976 14–4187 1065 354 38.0538 9.30 −0.512 VII Nuclear Fig. 1 Multiple alignment of the highly conserved SBP domains The detailed information about the SsSBPs was deduced by ExPASy server, including protein length, molecular weight (MW), theoretical isoelectric point (pI) and the grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY). The length of the SsSBPs ORF region varied from 570 bp ( SsSBP5 ) to 3195 bp ( SsSBP3–3 ) and the protein lengths ranged from 189 to 1064 amino acids. The MW of the proteins ranged from 19.3214 to 116.09958 kDa. The pI ranged from 5.37 to 10.32, and the values of GRAVY were all negative, suggesting that all SsSBPs are hydrophilic. Moreover, the subcellular localization of 50 SsSBP proteins was predicted by ProtComp software and found that all SsSBP proteins localized in the nucleus except SsSBP4 and SsSBP12 proteins, which have no NLS signal, and localize in the cell membrane (Fig. S1 ; Table 1 ). Phylogenetic analysis of the SBP gene families We selected a total of 293 SBP homologs from 17 representative species from 7 green plant families, including chlorophytes, bryophytes, lycophytes, gymnosperms, basal magnoliophytes, eudicots and monocots, for phylogenetic analysis of SBP. Among them, both Ostreococcus sp. RCC809 and Ostreococcus Lucimarinus in green algae had only one SBP gene; 46 SBP genes exist in soybean. In comparison to the number of genes in these species, SBP genes in S. spontaneum showed an obvious expansion in the number of genes (Fig. 2 ). To gain further insight into the phylogenetic relationship of SsSBP genes, a phylogenetic tree was constructed using SBP proteins from Arabidopsis, Vitis vinifera , Ananas comosus , Sorghum bicolor and Oryza sativa (Fig. 3 ). SBP genes from these different species could be classified into 8 groups (I to VIII), and SBP proteins also tend to cluster the similar group. As expected, SsSBPs exhibited a closer relationship with the SBP proteins from S. bicolor and O. sativa . Group V and VII contained maximum SsSBP genes, where SBP genes from S. bicolor and O. sativa were also grouped. While the group I contained only 2 members of SsSBP genes formed the smallest group. This result was in agreement with the conservation analysis of the SBP proteins in other plants like Arabidopsis , grape, rice and sorghum. For example, a relatively high homologous genes, AtSPL6 / SbSBP5 / OsSPL1 / SsSBP8 / SsSBP9 clustered in one evolutionary branch (Fig. 3 A). In addition, a ML phylogenetic tree was also constructed based on gene sequence similarity of 50 SsSBP proteins. The result indicated that the alleles of each SsSBP gene cluster in the same group, indicating that their sequences have high homology (Fig. 3 B). Fig. 2 Distribution of SBP genes in 17 species Fig. 3 Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of SBP gene family Structure characterization of SBP genes in S. spontaneum To better understand the genetic diversity of the SsSBP genes, the coding sequence of each gene was compared with their corresponding genomic sequence. The result revealed that the exon of SsSBP genes ranged from 2 to 13 in number (Fig. 4 ). SsSBP genes in group I contain 4–7 introns, group V contains 2–4 introns, group VI contains 1–2 introns, most of SsSBP members in group VIII contain 2 introns. Interestingly, alleles of SsSBP genes ( SsSBP1–1/2 , SsSBP3–1/2/4 , SsSBP4–1/2 , SsSBP15–2/3 , SsSBP17–1/2 , SsSBP18–1/2 , SsSBP20–1/2 , SsSBP21–1/2 and SsSBP24–1/2/3 ) had the same number of exon/introns, although the length of introns varied. Some alleles possessed different exon/intron numbers ( SsSBP2–1/2/3 , SsSBP7–1/2/3 , SsSBP10–1/2 , SsSBP11–1/2 ). The SsSBP3 allele gene SsSBP3–3 possessed the largest number (13) of exons, but the SsSBP3 alleles SsSBP3–1/2/4 only had 3 exons (Fig. 4 ). These results indicate that the number of exon and intron are diverse in different groups yet nearly consistent within the same group. Fig. 4 The exon/intron structure of sugarcane SBP genes The SsSBP genes clustered into the same group exhibited similar structure and possessed a similar motif sequence. A total of 20 motifs were identified in SsSBP proteins, designated as motif 1–20 (Fig. 5 , Fig. S2 ). The result expectedly showed that all SBP members contain Motif 1, Motif 2, Motif 3, Motif 5 and Motif 6, which was annotated as the SBP domain. Most of SBP members within the same group exhibited similar motif composition and exon-intron structure. In contrast, some motifs were found to be specific to one or two groups of SsSBP proteins. Motif 8 only appeared in group VIII. Motif 14, Motif 17 and Motif 19 were only present in group II, suggesting that proteins in these groups may have a specific biological function under a given condition. At the same time, the divergence among the different groups indicated their diverse functions. Fig. 5 Motif composition of sugarcane SBP proteins. The motif numbers from 1 to 20 are displayed in different colored boxes Chromosome distribution and gene duplication of SsSBP genes The chromosome distribution information of SsSBP genes revealed that 49 of the 50 SsSBP genes are located to the eight chromosomes of S. spontaneum , with the SsSBP30 mapped to the unanchored scaffolds (Fig. 6 ). On chromosomes 1 and 7, only two SsSBP genes were found. Chromosomes 3 and 5 contain five SsSBP genes. Chromosome 2 had the maximum number of SsSBP genes with 12 members, followed by chromosome 6 with 11 SsSBP genes. In addition, 27 synteny gene pairs were identified in sugarcane using MCScanX software, with 24 pairs of alleles and 3 pairs of nonalleles. It should be defined as a tandem duplication event if a chromosomal region within 200 kb containing two or more genes [ 31 ]. According to this criterion, only two tandem duplications ( SsSBP4–3 / SsSBP6 and SsSBP17–2 / SsSBP19 ) were noticed (Fig. 6 A, Table S3 ). These results indicate that segmental duplication events might significantly contribute to the SsSBP gene expansions than tandem duplication. Fig. 6 Gene location and synteny in sugarcane. A Synteny analysis of SBP genes within sugarcane. B Synteny analysis of SBP genes between sugarcane and sorghum To further analyze the evolutionary process of SsSBP genes, a comparative analysis of genome synteny blocks between S. spontaneum and Sorghum bicolor was conducted. Sorghum is the closest related diploid to sugarcane, and the comparison of gene structures between these two species provided clues to the evolutionary gene events caused by polyploidization. A total of 37 syntenic gene pairs between S. spontaneum and S. bicolor were found (Fig. 6 B, Table S3 ). To further understand the evolutionary forces on SsSBP genes, the ratio of the synonymous ( Ks ) and nonsynonymous ( Ka ) substitutions rate ( Ka / Ks ) was calculated for estimating the selection pressure of homologous genes, where Ka / Ks < 1 indicates purifying selection, Ka / Ks = 1 means neutral selection and Ka / Ks > 1 indicates positive selection [ 32 ]. In this study, with the exception of three gene pairs SsSBP4–1 / SsSBP5 (1.0379), SsSBP3–2 / SsSBP3–4 (1.98497), SsSBP24–2 / SsSBP24–3 (1.00893), Ka / Ks ratios of SsSBP homologous genes were less than 1, indicating that these genes probably underwent a purifying selection (Table S2 ). Similarly, most Ka / Ks values of sorghum genes were also less than 1, suggested that SBP genes of these two close species underwent a strong purifying selection to reduce adverse mutations after duplication during the evolutionary process (Table S3 ). miR156 target prediction, distribution and expression pattern analysis Previous studies showed that miR156 complementarily binds to SBP genes either at the coding or 3’UTR region and reducs gene expression level through translation repression or transcript cleavage [ 11 , 24 ]. In this present study, 22 SsSBP genes were found as the targets of miR156, and these genes were mainly distributed in groups V, VI, VII and VIII (Fig. 7 A). Among these SsSBP genes, miR156 complementary sequences were at their coding regions except SsSBP5 where miR156 binding in the 3′-UTR (Fig. 7 A; Fig. S3 ). Interestingly, the allelic genes SsSBP3–1 , SsSBP3–2 , SsSBP3–3 and SsSBP3–4 were all the targets of miR156 (Fig. 7 A). Although there are 20 miRNA members of Saccharum sp ., only one putative miRNA156 in S. spontaneum is represented in the miRbase database ( https://www.mirbase.org/ v 22.1). Therefore, we performed a genome-wide study and found 29 members of miR156 genes in S. spontaneum genome. These Ssp-miR156 genes were mainly distributed on chromosomes 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, except for chromosomes 1 and 7 (Fig. S4 ; Table S4 ). Ssp-miR156a , Ssp-miR156f , Ssp-miR156j and Ssp-miR156k as alleles were localized on chromosome 2A. Chromosome 3A possesses 4 Ssp-miR156a alleles. Chromosome 3B contains 3 miR156 members (2 Ssp-miR156a and 1 Ssp-miR156l ). Chromosome 4A has 4 miR156 members (3 Ssp-miR156a and 1 Ssp-miR156i ), followed by 2 and 3 members on chromosome 4B ( Ssp-miR156a and Ssp-miR156d ) and 5A (2 Ssp-miR156a and 1 Ssp-miR156e ), respectively. Two Ssp-miR156 were on chromosome 8A ( Ssp-miR156e and Ssp-miR156k ) and 8D (2 Ssp-miR156b ). Only 1 Ssp-miR156 was found on chromosome 2C ( Ssp-miR156b ), 2D ( Ssp-miR156b ), 3C ( Ssp-miR156a ), 6A ( Ssp-miR156a ) and 6B ( Ssp-miR156a ). However, no Ssp-miR156 members was found on chromosomes 1 and 7 (Fig. S4 ; Table S4 ). Fig. 7 Sequence alignment and expression patterns of miR156 compare with SsSBP genes. A Sequence alignment of the miR156 complementary sequences with the target sites in SsSBP genes. B The expression patterns of miR156 and their targets in different tissue samples. C - J The confirmation of miR156s and their targets by degradome ananlysis To further gain insight into the role of miR156 during female gametophyte development, we studied the miR156-SBP module during female gametophyte development. The results showed that the expression level of miR156 was mostly enriched in the mature stage of female reproductive development, and relatively low expression levels were found during the stages of AC (Archesporial Cell) to MMC (Megaspore Mother Cell). Generally, the expression level of miR156 increased from the initial stage to the mature stage of the female gametophyte by sRNA-seq analysis (Fig. 7 B; Table S5 ). In addition, the expression profiles of Ssp-miR156 precursors were also quantitatively verified using RT-PCR and qRT-PCR analysis. The results for the relative expression of Ssp-miR156 were consistent with the sRNA-seq data (Fig. S5 ). On the contrary, the expression level of target SsSBP genes was mostly decreased during the female gametophyte development stages, such as the target SsSBP11–1 , SsSBP21–2 , SsSBP22 and SsSBP30 (Fig. 7 B). To verify the authenticity of miR156-SBP module in sugarcane, we performed the degradome analysis and found that miR156 family members target the SsSBPs. The miR156k could bind the site 1400 bp of its target SsSBP2–1 (Fig. 7 C). Similarily, miR156a binds on the SsSBP3–2 (site 862) (Fig. 7 D), SsSBP7–1 (site 850) (Fig. 7 E), SsSBP7–3 (site 1110) (Fig. 7 F), SsSBP10–1 (site 568) (Fig. 7 G), SsSBP10–2 (site 1096) (Fig. 7 H), SsSBP11–1 (site 1140) (Fig. 7 I) and SsSBP21–1 (site 1065) (Fig. 7 J). Taken together, these results suggest that miR156- SBP module is highly conserved, and the regulation pattern has diverged in different species. Expression profiles analysis of SsSBP genes To study spatiotemporal expression patterns of SsSBP genes, RNA-seq data of different organs and tissues were analyzed. The expression level of SsSBP genes of leaf development and female reproductive organs is shown by heatmap representation (Fig. 8 ). As illustrated in Fig. 8 A, SsSBP4 , SsSBP6 , SsSBP13 , SsSBP14 , SsSBP18 , SsSBP21 and SsSBP26 sustained low expression level in sugarcane leaf gradient segments, while SsSBP1 and SsSBP20 showed high expression in the leaf gradient segments. The transcript levels of SsSBP7 , SsSBP10 , SsSBP19 , SsSBP22 , SsSBP28 and SsBP29 decreased gradually from base to mature zone of leaf in sugarcane, showed that gene expression decreased following the maturing leaf (Fig. 8 A, Table S6 ). Fig. 8 Expression profiling of SsSBP genes in different sugarcane tissues. The color bar shows the gene expression with log2 (FPKM+ 1). Green colors indicate low expression and red colors indicate high expression To investigate the SsSBP genes involvement in sugarcane female reproductive organ development, the transcription level of all SsSBP genes was extracted from RNA-seq data of sugarcane female reproductive organs. The heat map represents expression levels in the lines at five developmental stages shown in Fig. 8 B. Many SsSBP genes showed different expression patterns among these five development stages. SsSBP1 and SsSBP10 were highly expressed in different stages of female gametophyte development. The transcripts of 7 SsSBP genes ( SsSBP13 , SsSBP14 , SsSBP15 , SsSBP16 , SsSBP17 , SsSBP18 , SsSBP19 ) were zero in all these samples. The expression level of SsSBP7 and SsSBP30 showed differential expression during the female gametophyte development, revealing that these two genes may play an important role in AC and MMC stages (Fig. 8 B, Table S7 ). We also performed qRT-PCR experiments to confirm the expression level of some SsSBP genes in those different female developmental stages. As shown in Fig. S6 , the results of qRT-PCR data were highly consistent with the RNA-seq data for the relative expression of SsSBP genes during the female gametophyte development. Further studies may focus on the role of these genes on female reproductive development. Discussion Sugarcane ( S. spontaneum ) has been widely domesticated and cultivated for thousands of years for its excellent economic values. It has become essential industrial material for sugar sources [ 25 , 26 ]. The high quantity of genome data and abundance of increasing high-throughput transcriptome data make it possible to explore gene functions in non-model plants like Saccharum spp . Although the genome information of S. spontaneum L. is available, little progress has been made in sugarcane germplasm innovation and improvement due to the degeneration of sugarcane reproductive organs [ 28 , 29 ]. Previous studies revealed that SBP genes play crucial roles in plant development, especially in flower development, signaling transduction, and vegetative to reproductive phase transition [ 13 , 14 – 15 ]. However, the functions of S. spontaneum SBP genes remain unknown, although 17 SPLs were identified in sugarcane without taking alleles into account [ 33 ]. As for sugarcane genomic autopolyploidization, we conducted the genome-wide identification of SBP genes and their alleles in S. spontaneum , which resulted in the identification of 30 SBP genes (Fig. 1 , Table 1 ). The number of SBP genes in S. spontaneum was similar to that in P. trichocarpa (28), O. zativa (19), and S. bicolor (19), but smaller than that in G. max (46), indicating that SBP genes in different species underwent different gene duplication events. Based on phylogenetic and gene structure analysis, SsSBP genes could be divided into eight groups (group I-VIII), which is consistent with the results of previous studies on SBP genes [ 34 ]. In general, the members of SBP genes clustered into a subgroup shared similar gene structure and functions, suggesting these genes underwent common evolutionary origins. In other words, gene duplication events (segmental and tandem duplication) are the major driving forces for evolution and gene expansion by which many paralogous gene pairs are produced and could help organisms cope with different developmental processes [ 35 ]. In our study, a total of 27 duplication events were found in SsSBP genes, consisted of segmental duplications and tandem duplication (Fig. 6 ). The Ka/Ks ratio is reported as the criterion for estimation the gene duplication. The Ka/Ks ratio of a given > 1 means that the gene has experienced positive selection, = 1 suggests neutral selection and < 1 indicates purifying selection. Based on the values of Ka/Ks ratio, all the SsSBP gene pairs were duplicated under purifying selection except gene pairs SsSBP4–1 / SsSBP5 (1.0379), SsSBP3–2 / SsSBP3–4 (1.98497), SsSBP24–2 / SsSBP24–3 (1.00893) (Table S3 ). The diversity of SsSBP genes is likely to be motivated by gene duplication and genomic structure variation during the evolutionary process. Up to now, there is little functional information on the SBP genes of sugarcane. Generally, the gene functions, to a large extent, are correlated to their expression patterns. In this present study, the expression levels of 30 SsSBP genes were examined across the four different leaf gradient segments and five female gametophyte development stages (Fig. 7 ). Most SsSBPs were predominantly expressed in the initial developmental stages of either leaf development or female gametophyte development. These results were similar with other species in the apical meristem, including apical buds inflorescences and flower buds [ 9 , 10 , 22 ]. Among the SBP genes in Arabidopsis , AtSPL1 and AtSPL12 expressed highly in inflorescences and overexpression of these two genes enhanced the inflorescence thermotolerance [ 36 ]. AtSPL2 , AtSPL9 , AtSPL10 , AtSPL11 , AtSPL13 and AtSPL15 were reported to control the determination of leaf shape and the transformation of vegetative to reproductive stages [ 37 ]. Interestingly, the evolutionary analysis showed that AtSPL1 and AtSPL12 are highly orthologous to SsSBP genes in group II, including SsSBP1 , SsSBP20 and SsSBP25 . AtSPL2 , AtSPL9 and AtSPL10 are orthologous to SsSBP genes in the group V with SsSBP10 , SsSBP11 , SsSBP12 , SsSBP16 , and SsSBP29 . Based on the belief that homologous genes perform similar functions. SsSBP1 and SsSBP10 , which were expressed highly in female gametophyte stages, would be involved in the development of female reproductive organs in sugarcane. Three genes SsSBP1 , SsSBP20 , SsSBP25 grouped with SsSBP16 , SsSBP29 and SsSBP30 , which are orthologous to AtSPL2 , AtSPL9 and AtSPL10 , expressed highly in the sugarcane leaves, confirming their roles in the regulation of leaf development. Certainly, additional studies need to be performed to confirm the potential roles in female gametophyte development (for SsSBP1 and SsSBP10 ) and leaf development (for SsSBP1 , SsSBP20 , SsSBP25 , SsSBP16 , SsSBP29 and SsSBP30 ). In addition, miR156/SBP module has been reported to govern many aspects of plant growth and development [ 10 , 17 , 24 , 38 ]. Overexpression of miR156 in Arabidopsis significantly repressed the SPL transcription and resulted in the loss of apical dominance, leading to dwarfism, an increase in total leaf number, and plant biomass [ 39 ]. Meanwhile, the expression levels of the target SBP genes of miR156 were suppressed in the miR156 overexpressing plants [ 10 , 37 ]. In the present study, the transcript level of miR156 was abundant in the mature stage of female reproductive development (Fig. 7 B). In contrast, most putative target SsSBP genes predicted miR156 target sites showed lower expression levels in these tissues (Fig. 7 B). These results suggested that the transcript of miR156 is negatively correlated with the expression of most SsSBP genes (Fig. 8 ). All together, our results revealed that miR156/SBP module could be used as an important tool to genetically improve crop architecture and productivity. Conclusion A total of 30 SBP genes were identified in sugarcane ( S. spontaneum ) by genome-wide analysis. These SsSBP genes were comprehensively characterized and classified into eight groups. The phylogenetic analysis showed that these genes shared orthologous relationships of SBP members from Arabidopsis and rice. The spatiotemporal expression patterns of these SsSBP genes in different tissues indicate that SsSBP genes may regulate the leaf and female gametophyte development. Our results also showed that miR156 targeted many SsSBP genes. The expression level of miR156 was enriched in the female reproductive mature stages. The different expression levels between the miR156 and SsSBP genes in diverse tissues suggested that miR156/SBP module plays a crucial role in the leaf and female gametophyte development processes (Fig. 9 ). Taken together, our study provides the foundation for future in-depth elaboration of the potential functions of the SBP genes in the growth and development of sugarcane. Fig. 9 A summary work model of this study for SBP genes in sugarcane Methods Identification and annotation of SBP genes in sugarcane Sugarcane genome data, CDS, protein sequence and annotation data were downloaded from the sugarcane Genome database ( http://sugarcane.zhangjisenlab.cn/sgd/html/index.html ) [ 28 ]. Arabidopsis and other species sequences were searched and downloaded from Phytozome v13 ( https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html ) [ 40 ]. To identify the SBP genes in sugarcane, the HMM profile of the SBP domain (PF03110) was downloaded from the Pfam database ( http://pfam.xfam.org/ ) [ 41 ] and used as the query to search the sugarcane genome database. SBP homologs were obtained by running a local BLASTP search using the Arabidopsis and rice SBP sequence as a query against the given protein database with an E-value cutoff of 10 − 5 . The candidate genes were further confirmed by SMART server ( http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/ ). Sequences without the complete SBP domain were deleted. Finally, all the candidates were confirmed by multiple sequence alignments using DNAMAN software to ensure they contained the SBP domain. ExPASy ( https://www.expasy.org/ ) [ 42 ] server was used to calculate the detailed information about the SsSBPs in sugarcane, such as molecular weights (MW), isoionic point (pI), and the grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY). The subcellular localization of the SBP proteins identified was obtained using the ProtComp (v.9.0) software ( http://www.softberry.com/ ). Gene structure, sequence alignments and phylogenetic analysis of SsSBP genes The exon/intron structure of SBP genes was analyzed using Gene Structure Display Server ( http://gsds.cbi.pku.edu.cn/index.php ) [ 43 ] by comparing their coding and genomic sequences. Using BLASTP program to search homologous gene pairs among sugarcane and sorghum with the parameter of e-value = 1e-10. The estimation of selection and substitution rates, the non-synonymous (Ka), synonymous (Ks) and Ka/Ks substitution ratios of the homologous gene pairs of sugarcane and sorghum were calculated by the easy Ka/Ks calculation program. MCScanX software [ 44 ] was used to detect the gene synteny and collinearity in sugarcane, and the SBPs locations were shown using Circos software [ 45 ]. Multiple sequence alignment of SBP protein sequence from Arabidopsis , rice, and sorghum was conducted using the MUSCLE in MEGA (v.6.0) [ 46 ]. A phylogenetic tree was constructed using RAxML software ( http://www.phylo.org/index.php/ ) using the maximum likelihood (ML) method with bootstrap 1000 replications. The phylogenetic tree was displayed and manipulated using the Interactive tree of life (iTOL, https://itol.embl.de/ ) [ 47 , 48 – 49 ]. Conserved motif identification, miR156 target site prediction and distribution The conserved motifs of SsSBP proteins were identified using the online program MEME ( http://meme-suite.org/tools/meme ) [ 50 ] with the default setting parameters: maximum number of motifs to find was 20; minimum width of motif was 6 and maximum width of motif was 50. The sequence logos of the SsSBP domain were showed by TBtools [ 51 ]. To predict the putative target sites of miR156, the cDNA sequences of SsSBP genes were analyzed using psRNATarget tool ( http://plantgrn.noble.org/psRNATarget/ ). The chromosome location information of the Ssp-miR156s and SBPs were searched in sugarcane genome databases, and MapInspect software was used to generate chromosomal distribution information. Plant material and sample preparation The sugarcane ( S. spontaneum L.) cultivar Yuetang 91–976 was grown and collected by State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-Bioresources (Guangxi, China), and all samples from this cultivar was adopted for all experiment. When the plants reached the age of florescence stage, five different stages of the sugarcane female gametophyte development (i.e., AC, MMC, Meiosis, Mitosis and Mature) were collected. All samples were harvested as three biological replicates, which were quick-freeze with liquid nitrogen and stored at ultra-low temperature to facilitate the extraction of RNA. RNA extraction, expression profiles and qRT-PCR analysis Total RNA was isolated by the Omega Total RNA kit II (R6934–02, USA). The evaluation of RNA quality was performed by the gel electrophoresis and 2000 spectrophotometer assessment at 260 nm (NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and Illumina sequencing was done using the method of Zhao et al. (2018). For qRT-PCR analysis, the cDNA was synthesized using the ThermoScript RT-PCR kit (Life Technologies) in a 20 μL volume reaction under the program: 42 °C for 15 min and 85 °C for 15 s. According to the SYBR Premix RT reagent kit system (TaKaRa, Dalian, China), the reaction contains 1 μg RNA prior to qRT-PCR. To understand the expression profiles of SBP genes, the RNA-seq data of leaf development were downloaded from the Saccharum Genome database ( http://sugarcane.zhangjisenlab.cn/sgd/html/index.html ). The RNA-seq data of female reproductive development have been deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA, accession number PRJEB44944). Different leaf developmental stages, including basal zone, a transitional zone, a maturing zone, a mature zone [ 52 , 53 ], and the female reproductive development stages, AC, MMC, Meiosis, Mitosis and Mature, were used for the study. The RNA-seq raw reads were filtered by Trimmomatic software with default parameters to obtain clean reads. The clean reads were mapped to the reference genome using Hisat2 [ 54 ]. Gene expression was calculated by Cufflinks software [ 55 ]. The log2-transformed RPKM value of the expression patterns of SsSBP genes was used to generate the heatmap using the pheatmap package in R software. The expression pattern of miR156 was calculated by count values according to the miRNA-seq data. To further confirm the expression profiles of the SsSBP genes, qRT-PCR assays were performed in different female reproductive development stages. qRT-PCR was conducted in CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) using SYBR Green (TaKaRa) according to the instructions. Each reaction contains 12.5 μL SYBR mixture, 1.0 μL specific primer and 1 μg sample template. Three replicate reactions were performed for each sample under the following program: 95 °C for 30s; 40 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s; 60 °C for 30 s. The primers used in this study are listed in Table S1 .
METHODS
. RNA extraction, expression profiles and qRT-PCR analysis Total RNA was isolated by the Omega Total RNA kit II (R6934–02, USA). The evaluation of RNA quality was performed by the gel electrophoresis and 2000 spectrophotometer assessment at 260 nm (NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and Illumina sequencing was done using the method of Zhao et al. (2018). For qRT-PCR analysis, the cDNA was synthesized using the ThermoScript RT-PCR kit (Life Technologies) in a 20 μL volume reaction under the program: 42 °C for 15 min and 85 °C for 15 s. According to the SYBR Premix RT reagent kit system (TaKaRa, Dalian, China), the reaction contains 1 μg RNA prior to qRT-PCR. To understand the expression profiles of SBP genes, the RNA-seq data of leaf development were downloaded from the Saccharum Genome database ( http://sugarcane.zhangjisenlab.cn/sgd/html/index.html ). The RNA-seq data of female reproductive development have been deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA, accession number PRJEB44944). Different leaf developmental stages, including basal zone, a transitional zone, a maturing zone, a mature zone [ 52 , 53 ], and the female reproductive development stages, AC, MMC, Meiosis, Mitosis and Mature, were used for the study. The RNA-seq raw reads were filtered by Trimmomatic software with default parameters to obtain clean reads. The clean reads were mapped to the reference genome using Hisat2 [ 54 ]. Gene expression was calculated by Cufflinks software [ 55 ]. The log2-transformed RPKM value of the expression patterns of SsSBP genes was used to generate the heatmap using the pheatmap package in R software. The expression pattern of miR156 was calculated by count values according to the miRNA-seq data. To further confirm the expression profiles of the SsSBP genes, qRT-PCR assays were performed in different female reproductive development stages. qRT-PCR was conducted in CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) using SYBR Green (TaKaRa) according to the instructions. Each reaction contains 12.5 μL SYBR mixture, 1.0 μL specific primer and 1 μg sample template. Three replicate reactions were performed for each sample under the following program: 95 °C for 30s; 40 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s; 60 °C for 30 s. The primers used in this study are listed in Table S1 .
        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 16:52:31,562 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 16:52:31,564 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 16:52:31,565 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 16:52:31,565 - INFO - {"entries": [
    {
        "accession": "PRJEB44944",
        "accession_type": "ENA",
        "organism": "Saccharum spontaneum L.",
        "genotype": "Yuetang 91–976",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "main text",
        "evidence_text": null
    }
],
"notes": "The accession number PRJEB44944 is mentioned in the main text as the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) accession number for the RNA-seq data of female reproductive development."}
2025-10-28 16:52:31,565 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJEB40481/10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf

2025-10-28 16:52:31,570 - INFO - detected formats: [<InputFormat.PDF: 'pdf'>]
2025-10-28 16:52:31,605 - INFO - Going to convert document batch...
2025-10-28 16:52:31,605 - INFO - Initializing pipeline for StandardPdfPipeline with options hash 5f7f6517f72f4ee63b4977e857fdeb61
2025-10-28 16:52:31,605 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:52:33,141 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:52:34,002 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:52:34,379 - INFO - Processing document 10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf
2025-10-28 16:52:57,403 - INFO - Finished converting document 10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf in 25.83 sec.
2025-10-28 16:52:57,454 - WARNING - Parameter `strict_text` has been deprecated and will be ignored.
2025-10-28 16:52:57,460 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:52:57,460 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:52:57,460 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:52:57,471 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf
2025-10-28 16:52:57,471 - INFO - Characters: 179615
2025-10-28 16:52:57,472 - INFO - Words (approx): 23305
2025-10-28 16:52:57,474 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 30296.5
2025-10-28 16:52:57,474 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 16:52:57,474 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 16:52:57,474 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        <!-- image -->

## Edited by:

Dirk Walther,

Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Germany

## Reviewed by:

Prathima Perumal Thirugnanasambandam, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Coimbatore, India Ertugrul Filiz, Duzce University, Turkey

## *Correspondence:

Anete Pereira de Souza anete@unicamp.br

## Specialty section:

This article was submitted to Plant Systems and Synthetic Biology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Plant Science

Received: 16 February 2021 Accepted: 17 March 2021 Published: 07 July 2021

## Citation:

Aono AH, Pimenta RJG, Garcia ALB, Correr FH, Hosaka GK, Carrasco MM, Cardoso-Silva CB, Mancini MC, Sforça DA, dos Santos LB, Nagai JS, Pinto LR, Landell MGdA, Carneiro MS, Balsalobre TW, Quiles MG, Pereira WA, Margarido GRA and de Souza AP (2021) The Wild Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes: Insights Into Expansion, Diversification, and Expression Patterns. Front. Plant Sci. 12:668623. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.668623

<!-- image -->

## The Wild Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes: Insights Into Expansion, Diversification, and Expression Patterns

Alexandre Hild Aono 1 , Ricardo José Gonzaga Pimenta  1 , Ana Letycia Basso Garcia 2 , Fernando Henrique Correr  2 , Guilherme Kenichi Hosaka 2 , Marishani Marin Carrasco 1 , Cláudio Benício Cardoso-Silva 1 , Melina Cristina Mancini 1 , Danilo Augusto Sforça 1 , Lucas Borges dos Santos  1 , James Shiniti Nagai 3 , Luciana Rossini Pinto 4 , Marcos Guimarães de Andrade Landell  4 , Monalisa Sampaio Carneiro 5 , Thiago Willian Balsalobre 5 , Marcos Gonçalves Quiles 6 , Welison Andrade Pereira 7 , Gabriel Rodrigues Alves Margarido  2  and Anete Pereira de Souza 1,8 *

1   Center for Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering (CBMEG), University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil, 2 Department of Genetics, Luiz de Queiroz College of Agriculture (ESALQ), University of São Paulo (USP), Piracicaba, Brazil, 3   Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Computational Genomics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,  4   Advanced Center of Sugarcane Agrobusiness Technological Research, Agronomic Institute of Campinas (IAC), Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 5   Departamento de Biotecnologia e Produção Vegetal e Animal, Centro de Ciências Agrárias, Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCar), São Carlos, Brazil, 6 Instituto de Ciência e Tecnologia (ICT), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (Unifesp), São José dos Campos, Brazil,  7   Department of Biology, Federal University of Lavras (UFLA), Lavras, Brazil, 8 Department of Plant Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil

The protein kinase (PK) superfamily is one of the largest superfamilies in plants and the core regulator of cellular signaling. Despite this substantial importance, the kinomes of sugarcane and sorghum have not been profiled. Here, we identified and profiled the complete kinomes of the polyploid Saccharum spontaneum (Ssp) and Sorghum bicolor (Sbi), a close diploid relative. The Sbi kinome was composed of 1,210 PKs; for Ssp, we identified 2,919 PKs when disregarding duplications and allelic copies, and these were related to 1,345 representative gene models. The Ssp and Sbi PKs were grouped into 20  groups  and  120  subfamilies  and  exhibited  high  compositional  similarities  and evolutionary divergences. By utilizing the collinearity between the species, this study offers insights into Sbi and Ssp speciation, PK differentiation and selection. We assessed the PK subfamily expression profiles via RNA-Seq and identified significant similarities between Sbi and Ssp. Moreover, coexpression networks allowed inference of a core structure of kinase interactions with specific key elements. This study provides the first categorization of the allelic specificity of a kinome and offers a wide reservoir of molecular and genetic information, thereby enhancing the understanding of Sbi and Ssp PK evolutionary history.

Keywords: coexpression networks, kinase gene family, phylogenetic analyses, RNA-Seq, Saccharum spontaneum , Sorghum bicolor

## INTRODUCTION

Sugarcane  is  one  of  the  world's  most  important  crops,  with the  highest  production  quantity  and  the  sixth  highest  net production  value  in  2016  (FAO,  2020).  For  years,  this  crop has  accounted  for  approximately  80%  of  the  worldwide  sugar production  (ISO,  2020)  and  is  predicted  to  account  for  nearly 40%  of  the  planet's  first-generation  biofuel  supply  in  the  near future  (Lalman  et  al.,  2016).  However,  it  is  also  known  for its  unprecedented genomic complexity; modern cultivars arose from  interspecific  crosses  between  two  autopolyploid  species, namely Saccharum officinarum (2 n =  8x  =  80, x =  10;  D'Hont et  al.,  1998)  and  the  wild Saccharum  spontaneum (2 n =  5x =40  to  16x  =  128; x =  8;  Panje  and  Babu,  1960).  These hybridizations  produced  large  ( ∼ 10  Gb),  highly  polyploid  and aneuploid  genomes  (Sforça  et  al.,  2019).

Sugarcane  genomic  research  is  hampered  by  this  genomic complexity,  and  for  many  years,  depended  on  resources  from a  closely  related  species:  sorghum  ( Sorghum  bicolor ). S.  bicolor (Sbi)  is  a  stress-resistant,  multifunctional  cereal  crop  that  is primarily grown as a staple food in Africa but can also be used for  fodder,  sugar,  and  biofuel  production  (Serna-Saldívar  et  al., 2012). Saccharum and Sorghum belong to the Saccharinae subtribe of the Poaceae family (Clayton, 1987); however, unlike sugarcane, Sorghum has not undergone recent polyploidization events ( ∼ 96 million  years;  Guo  et  al.,  2019)  and  thus  has  a  diploid  and much smaller genome that was fully sequenced in 2009 (Paterson et  al.,  2009).  Due  to  both  the  evolutionary  proximity  between the  two  species  and  the  extensive  collinearity  between  their chromosomes, sorghum has historically been considered a diploid model  for  sugarcane  (Grivet  and  Arruda,  2002).

The  superfamily  of  protein  kinases  (PKs)  comprises  the enzymes responsible for catalyzing the reversible phosphorylation of  proteins  -  one  of  the  most  widespread  posttranslational modifications across all living organisms. PKs act by transferring the terminal phosphate group from ATP to the hydroxyl group of  a  serine,  threonine,  or  tyrosine  residue  in  the  target  protein (Hunter,  1995).  These  reactions  are  key  events  regulating  the activity and interactions of proteins; therefore, PKs are relevant in  many  cellular  and  metabolic  processes  (Champion  et  al., 2004). In plants, they are involved in the regulation of circadian rhythms and cell cycles, the modulation of various developmental and  intracellular  processes,  and  the  control  of  cellular  cycles and metabolism (Lehti-Shiu and Shiu, 2012). PKs also participate in responses to drought, heat, and metal toxicity (Hasanuzzaman, 2020) and in the defense responses to herbivores and pathogens (Falco  et  al.,  2001;  Meng  and  Zhang,  2013).  Several  of  these responses  are  predicted  to  become  increasingly  relevant  in agriculture as a result of climate  change;  indeed,  extreme temperatures  and  drought  are  obvious  threats  from  global warming  (Dai,  2013;  Teixeira  et  al.,  2013).  Moreover,  pest control is also prone to become more challenging with climate instability (Gregory et al., 2009). Therefore, the study of molecules and  processes  associated  with  both  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses is  highly  relevant  to  the  current  setting  (Ahuja  et  al.,  2010).

Dardick  et  al.  (2007)  noted  that  phylogenomic  studies  are particularly  valuable  in  the  analysis  of  large  and  conserved gene  groups  such  as  PKs  because  of  their  ability  to  form  a basis  for  functional  predictions  and  permit  the  identification of  genes  with  unique  properties,  which  can  in  turn  allow rational  selection  of  candidates  for  more  detailed  studies.  The first  works  on  the  classification  of  PKs  were  based  on  the conservation  and  phylogenetic  analyses  of  catalytic  domains of  eukaryotic  proteins  (Hanks and Hunter, 1995). Later studies also considered sequence similarity and domain structure outside the  catalytic  domains  in  categorization  (Manning  et  al.,  2002; Niedner et al., 2006). More recently, the availability of low-cost technologies  for  sequencing  whole  genomes  have  allowed  the characterization  of  species'  kinomes,  i.e.,  their  entire  repertoire of  PKs.  Compared  to  the  human  genome,  plant  genomes generally contain not only many more PK genes but also atypical kinase families -either exclusive to plant  genomes  or  of prokaryotic origin (Zulawski and Schulze, 2015). This expansion likely  resulted  from  segmental,  whole-genome,  and  tandem duplication  events  (Hanada  et  al.,  2008). Arabidopsis  thaliana was  the  first  plant  to  have  its  kinome  compiled  (Champion et  al.,  2004),  followed  by  several  other  economically  important species (Dardick et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2018b).

Several studies have characterized kinases in sugarcane. The broadest  study  is  likely  that  conducted  by  Papini-Terzi  et  al. (2005), who identified sequences corresponding to signal transduction components in the sugarcane expressed sequence tag  database  (Vettore  et  al.,  2003).  Although  they  obtained substantial  results  considering  the  limited  resources  available at  the  time,  these  researchers  reported  a  relatively  low  number of  PKs.  Other  studies  have  revealed  that  sugarcane  PKs  are involved in this plant's development and response to environmental  stimuli  (Carraro  et  al.,  2001;  Pagariya  et  al., 2012;  Li  et  al.,  2017).  Even  more  relevant  is  the  compelling evidence  that  a  leucine-rich  repeat  (LRR)  receptor-like  kinase is related to sucrose-accumulating sugarcane tissues and genotypes,  which  indicates  its  involvement  in  the  regulation of  sucrose  synthesis  (Vicentini  et  al.,  2009).  However,  a  more comprehensive  characterization  of  sugarcane  PKs  has  not  yet been  performed.  Recently,  a  high-quality,  chromosome-level genome  assembly  for  sugarcane  was  made  available  (Zhang et al., 2018). The assembly of the genome of the S.  spontaneum (Ssp)  AP85-441  clone  (2 n =  4x  =  32)  is  also  allele-defined, i.e., it provides separate sequences of each of the four chromosome copies  (haplotypes).  Therefore,  each  gene  can  show  up  to  four alleles (Zhang et al., 2018, 2019b; Li et al., 2020). The availability of  this  information-rich  reference  has  since  opened  a  range of possibilities  in  sugarcane  research,  such  as  the  detailed characterization  of  specific  groups  of  genes.  Since  polyploidy may  result  in  chromosome  rearrangements,  gene  loss,  and unequal rates of sequence evolution and can favor gene neofunctionalization (Premachandran et al., 2011), the sugarcane genome  provides  fertile  ground  for  related  evolutionary  and functional  studies.

In  this  context,  the  main  objective  of  this  work  was  to identify  and  classify  the  complete  set  of  PKs  present  in  the Ssp and Sbi genomes. For this purpose, we performed phylogenetic analyses and in silico predictions of the properties of  these  proteins.  Taking  advantage  of  the  completeness  of  the

available information, we explored the impact of whole-genome and tandem duplications in the distribution and diversification of  the  genes  encoding  PKs  in  the  genomes  of  the  two  plants. Finally, we constructed coexpression  networks  using  RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to evaluate the expression of PK-encoding genes across different sugarcane and sorghum tissues and  genotypes.

## MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

## Kinase Identification and Domain Investigation

All  kinase  identification  procedures  were  performed  for  both Sbi  and  Ssp.  The  Sbi  protein-coding  gene  sequences  and additional  files  from  the  Sbi  genome  (v3.1.1)  were  obtained from  Phytozome  v.13  (Goodstein  et  al.,  2012).  Ssp  data  were obtained  from  the  AP85-441  genome  (Zhang  et  al.,  2018). The  Ssp  reference  contains  information  at  the  allele  level, considering the most conserved allele among all allelic copies and  paralog/tandem  duplications  of  each  gene  to  represent it  as  a  'gene  model'  (GM).  In  this  assembly,  the  first  part of a gene accession number refers to the GM; the last number refers  to  order  of  the  allele;  and  the  last  letter  may  refer  to the  allelic  copy  (haplotypes  A-D),  it  belongs  to  or  indicate that  the  gene  is  tandemly  (T)  or  dispersedly  (P)  duplicated. For Ssp, we identified PK genes in two ways: first, disregarding allelic  relationships  among  genes;  and  secondly,  considering their  organization  into  GMs.  All  sequences  obtained  were aligned against the 'typical' Pkinase (PF00069) and Pkinase\_Tyr (PF07714)  families  with  hidden  Markov  models  (HMMs) retrieved from the Pfam database (El-Gebali et al., 2019) using HMMER  v.3.3  (Eddy,  1998).  An E -value  cutoff  of  0.1  was used,  and  we  retained  only  sequences  that  covered  at  least 50%  of  the  respective  Pkinase  domain.  To  avoid  redundancy, we  selected  only  the  longest  variant  for  genes  with  isoforms. The domain composition of the putative PKs was also investigated via the  HMMER  web  server  (Finn  et  al.,  2011) and  Pfam  database.  The  distribution  of  PKs  across  the  Sbi and  Ssp  chromosomes  was  visualized  using  MapChart  v2.2 software  (Voorrips,  2002).

## Subfamily Classification and Phylogenetic Analyses

All  PKs  identified  were  classified  into  subfamilies  according to  HMMs built based on a previous classification and analyses of  kinases  of  25  plant  species  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012): Aquilegia  coerulea (Aco), Arabidopsis  lyrata (Aly), A.  thaliana (Ath), Brachypodium  distachyon (Bdi), Carica  papaya (Cpa), Citrus  clementina (Ccl), Citrus  sinensis (Csi), Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Cre), Cucumis  sativus (Csa), Eucalyptus  grandis (Egr), Glycine  max (Gma), Manihot  esculenta (Mes), Medicago truncatula (Mtr), Mimulus guttatus (Mgu), Oryza sativa (Osa), Populus  trichocarpa (Ptr), Prunus  persica (Ppe), Physcomitrella patens (Ppa), Ricinus communis (Rco), Selaginella moellendorffii (Smo), Setaria  italica (Sit), Vitis  vinifera (Vvi), Volvox  carteri

(Vca), Zea  mays (Zma),  and  an  earlier  version  of  the  Sbi genome, which we called v.1. Each Ssp and Sbi protein, previously identified  as  a  putative  kinase,  was  aligned  against  all  these subfamily  HMMs  and  considered  as  part  of  the  top-scoring subfamily ( E -value cutoff of 0.1). This classification was confirmed through  phylogenetic  analyses.  The  Pkinase  domains  of  the putative PKs were aligned using Muscle v.3.8.31 (Edgar, 2004), and  a  phylogenetic  tree  was  estimated  using  a  maximum likelihood approach implemented in FastTreeMP v2.1.10 (Price et  al.,  2010)  with  1,000  bootstrap  replicates  using  the  CIPRES gateway  (Miller  et  al.,  2010).  Different  trees  were  constructed for  PKs  from  Sbi;  PKs  from  Ssp;  and  PKs  from  both  Sbi  and Ssp. The dendrogram was visualized using R statistical software (R  Core  Team,  2013)  with  the  ggtree  (Yu  et  al.,  2017)  and ggplot2  (Villanueva  and  Chen,  2019)  packages.

## Kinase Characterization

For  each  PK  identified,  the  following  characteristics  were determined:  gene  chromosomal  location  and  intron  number, using GFF files; predicted subcellular localization, with WoLF PSORT (Horton  et  al.,  2007),  CELLO  v.2.5  (Yu  et  al.,  2006) and LOCALIZER v.1.0.4 (Sperschneider et al., 2017) programs; presence  of  N-terminal  signal  peptides,  using  SignalP  v.4.1 Server  (Petersen  et  al.,  2011);  presence  of  transmembrane domains,  using  TMHMM  v.2.0  Server  (Krogh  et  al.,  2001); and Gene Ontology (GO) categories (Ashburner et al., 2000), using the Blast2GO  tool  (Conesa  et  al., 2005)  with  the SWISS-PROT  (Bairoch  and  Apweiler,  2000)  and  UniProt (UniProt Consortium, 2007) databases. For Sbi PKs, alternative splicing (AS) events were investigated using the Plant Alternative  Splicing  Database  (Min,  2013;  Min  et  al.,  2015). The  comparison  of  these  characteristics  and  calculation  of descriptive  statistics  were  performed  with  R.  Analysis  and visualization  of  GO  categories  were  performed  using  the REViGO  tool  (Supek  et  al.,  2011).

## Duplication Events

To  investigate  PK  duplication  events,  we  used  the  Multiple Collinearity Scan (MCScanX) toolkit (Wang et al., 2012). Tandem duplications  were  visualized  with  MapChart,  and  segmental events  were  visualized  with  Circos  software  (Krzywinski  et  al., 2009). Synonymous  substitution ( Ks ) and  nonsynonymous substitution ( Ka ) rates were also estimated for segmental duplications using MCScanX (Wang et al., 2012), and Ks values were used to estimate the date of duplication events: T = Ks /2 λ , where λ is the mean value of the clock-like rates of synonymous substitutions  (6.5  ×  10 -9 ;  Gaut  et  al.,  1996).

## RNA-Seq Experiments

Data from several RNA-Seq experiments were used to estimate kinase expression, as summarized in Table 1 .  Sbi  datasets were retrieved from NCBI's Sequence Read Archive (SRA; Leinonen et  al.,  2010)  and  are  described  in Supplementary  Table  1 . Samples  from  different  tissues  and  varieties  were  used  (Dugas et al., 2011; Freeling et al., 2015; Makita et al., 2015; Kebrom  et  al., 2017; Varoquaux  et  al., 2019). To  analyze

TABLE 1  | Information on samples used for RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) experiments.

| Sugarcane      | Sugarcane         | Sugarcane            |
|----------------|-------------------|----------------------|
| Species        | Genotype          | Tissue               |
| S. officinarum | Badila De Java    | Culms                |
| S. officinarum | Criolla Rayada    | Leaves               |
| S. officinarum | White Transparent | Leaves               |
| S. robustum    | IJ76-318          | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-58           | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-88           | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | Krakatau          | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | SES205A           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | F36-819           | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | IACSP93-3046      | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | R570              | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB72454           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855113          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855156          | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855536          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB867515          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB92579           | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP79-1011         | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP80-3280         | Culms, leaves, roots |
| Saccharum sp.  | TUC71-7           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | US85-1008         | Leaves               |

## Sorgum

| Species         | Genotype   | Tissue                                                                       |
|-----------------|------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Pollen, microspore, roots, ligule epidermial tissue, blade epidermial tissue |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Roots, shoots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Seeds, spikelets, top internodes                                             |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX642     | Leaves, roots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | R.07020    | Internodes 1-4                                                               |
| Sorghum bicolor | RTX430     | Leaves, roots                                                                |

sugarcane  kinase  expression,  we  used  one  published  and  three novel  RNA-Seq  datasets  described  in  the  following  section.

## Sugarcane  Plant  Material  and  RNA-Seq

Sugarcane  hybrids  and S.  officinarum and  Ssp  clones  were  used for expression analyses in sugarcane. Four independent experiments were  performed  and  are  detailed  in Supplementary  Table  2 . Experiment  1  was  based  on  root  material  from  the  RB867515, RB92579, RB855113, RB855536, SP79-1011, and SP80-3280 hybrid cultivars.  This  trial  was  carried  out  in  a  greenhouse  with  three replicates per cultivar in a completely randomized design. Plants were grown in 18-L plastic pots with a mixture of 20% commercial planting  mix  and  80%  sand.  Ninety-five  days  after  planting, we sampled the root material of each plant, avoiding tiller roots.

Experiments  2  and  3  were  performed  with  leaf  and  culm (internode  1)  samples,  respectively,  from  plants  grown  in  the field  in  Araras,  Brazil  (22 ° 18 ' 41.0 '' and  23 ' 05.0 '' W,  at  an altitude  of  611  m).  Leaf  samples  were  collected  from  portions of the top visible dewlap leaves (+1) of 6-month-old sugarcane plants  in  April  2016.  We  collected  the  middle  section  of  each leaf,  removing  the  midrib.  For  culms,  samples  from  the  first internode  were  collected  at  four  time  points  in  2016:  April (synchronous  with  leaf  sampling),  June,  August,  and  October.

In Experiment 2, described by Correr et al. (2020), we used samples  from  the  SP80-3280,  RB72454,  and  RB855156  hybrid cultivars; TUC71-7 and US85-1008 hybrids; White Transparent and Criolla Rayada S. officinarum genotypes; IN84-58, IN84-88, Krakatau, and SES205A Ssp genotypes; and IJ76-318 Saccharum robustum genotypes.  For  six  genotypes  -  SP80-3280,  RB72454, US85-1008, White Transparent, IN84-58, and SES205A -we  collected  and  sequenced  three  biological  replicates,  while the  others  were  represented  by  one  biological  replicate;  all samples  were  represented  by  three  technical  replicates.  Leaf samples  were  sequenced  in  two  lanes.  In  Experiment  3,  culm samples  were  collected  from  the  SP80-3280  and  R570  hybrid cultivars, F36-819 hybrid, and IN84-58 S. spontaneum genotype. Culm  samples  were  sequenced  in  six  lanes.

Experiment  4  was  based  on  samples  from  the  SP80-3280 and IACSP93-3046 hybrid cultivars, Badila De Java S. officinarum genotype,  and  Krakatau  Ssp  genotype.  RNA  samples  were extracted  in  triplicate  from  the  top  (internode  3)  and  bottom (internode  8)  culms  and  collected  in  the  field  in  Ribeirão Preto,  Brazil  (21 ° 12 ' 28.7 '' S,  47 ° 52 ' 29.1 '' W)  in  June  2016.

After  collection,  samples  were  immediately  frozen  in  liquid nitrogen  and  stored  at -80 ° C  until  processed.  Total  RNA  was extracted  from  200  mg  of  ground  roots  and  50  mg  of  ground leaves or culms using an RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,  United  States).  We  quantified  the  RNA  and  verified  its integrity  in  a  2100  BioAnalyzer  using  a  Eukaryote  Total  RNA Nano Assay (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States). A total of 300 ng of RNA per sample was used to prepare cDNA libraries  with  a  TruSeq  Stranded  mRNA  LT  Kit  (Illumina,  San Diego, CA, United States). Libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 platform  (Illumina,  San  Diego,  CA,  United  States).

## RNA-Seq Data Processing and Coexpression Network Construction

The  quality  of  the  RNA-Seq  data  was  assessed  using  FastQC software (Andrews, 2010). For read filtering and adapter removal, we  used  Trimmomatic  v.0.39  (Bolger  et  al.,  2014).  In  the  Sbi and sugarcane datasets, bases with Phred scores below 20 were removed,  and  reads  shorter  than  30  bp  were  filtered  out.  In the  sugarcane  datasets,  we  also  removed  the  first  12  bases  of each read and increased the filter length to 75 bp. For transcript quantification,  we  used  the  DNA  coding  sequences  (CDSs) from each species  as  reference,  with  k-mers  of  lengths  31  and 17  for  Ssp  and  Sbi,  respectively,  in  Salmon  v.1.1.0  software (Patro et al., 2015). PK expression quantification was evaluated with transcripts per million (TPM) values. Heatmaps visualizing the expression of kinase subfamilies among tissues and cultivars were  generated  using  the  R  package  pheatmap  (Kolde  and Kolde, 2015) with average TPM values and a complete-linkage hierarchical  clustering  approach  based  on  Euclidean  distances.

Coexpression networks were estimated for PK subfamilies using a  minimum  Pearson  correlation  coefficient  of  0.6  between  PK quantifications across different subfamilies. Network analyses were performed using the R package igraph (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006).

To  assess  the  Ssp  and  Sbi  network  structures,  hub  scores  for each subfamily were calculated considering Kleinberg's hub centrality scores  (Kleinberg,  1999),  edge  betweenness  values  estimated  by the  number  of  geodesics  passing  through  the  edge  (Brandes, 2001), and communities defined using a propagating label approach (Raghavan  et  al.,  2007).

## RESULTS

## Genome-Wide Identification of PKs in Sugarcane and Sorghum

Using the established bioinformatic pipeline, we  identified 2,919 putative Ssp and 1,210 putative Sbi PKs ( Supplementary  Tables  3 and 4 ),  which  were  classified  into groups and subfamilies according to the top-scoring correspondence  to  HMMs  of  25  plant  species  (Lehti-Shiu  and Shiu,  2012; Supplementary  Tables  5 and 6 )  and  phylogenetic approaches  ( Supplementary  Figures  1-3 ),  as  fully  described in Supplementary Results (Genome-Wide Identification of PKs in  Sugarcane  and  Sorghum  section).  Similar  to  other  kinomes (Singh  et  al.,  2014;  Wei  et  al.,  2014;  Zulawski  et  al.,  2014;  Liu et  al.,  2015;  Y an  et  al.,  2017,  2018;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b),  the most  abundant  group  in  both  species  was  the  receptor-like kinase  (RLK)-Pelle  group  ( Figure  1 ),  which  accounted  for ∼ 70%  of  the  PKs,  followed  by  the  calcium-  and  calmodulinregulated  kinase  (CAMK);  cyclin-dependent  kinase,  mitogenactivated  protein  kinase,  glycogen  synthase  kinase,  and  cyclindependent  kinase-like kinase (CMGC);  tyrosine  kinase-like kinase (TKL); serine/threonine kinase (STE); and cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (cAPK), cGMP-dependent protein kinase,  and  lipid  signaling  kinase  families  (AGC);  and  casein kinase  1  (CK1)  groups.  This  expansion  in  the  Sbi  and  Ssp kinomes  is  apparently  related  to  a  few  specific  families  within the group, most notably LRR, RLCK, DLSV, L-LEC, and SD-2b. These families have been associated with the increased number of  kinases  in  RLK-Pelle  (Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b),  mostly  because of their relationship to biotic and  abiotic stress  responses (Dezhsetan, 2017). The subfamily abundances obtained for Ssp

<!-- image -->

and Sbi were similar, and only the pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha kinase (PEK\_PEK) subfamily was exclusive to Sbi.

We compared the subfamily quantities to other plant species (Lehti-Shiu and Shiu, 2012). The heatmap ( Supplementary  Figure  4 )  visualizing  the  similarities  in  the numbers of  PKs  indicated  a  closeness  between  the  Ssp  and  Sbi kinase compositions; however, both exhibited closer relationships with other species than with each other.  The  dendrogram constructed  based  on  the  columns  (plant  species)  enabled  the identification  of  the  species  most  similar  to  Sbi  and  Ssp  in terms  of  PK  quantities.  Sbi  was  found  to  belong  to  a  cohesive clade  with  Zma,  Bdi,  and  Sbi  v.1,  and  Ssp  belonged  to  a  clade with  Sit  and  Osa.  Interestingly,  although  the  two  groups  were separated  by  other  species,  together,  they  corresponded  to  all of  the  monocotyledon  species  under  comparison.

A full characterization of Ssp and Sbi PKs is described  in Supplementary Results (Characterization  of  PKs section) and summarized in Figure 2 , including their chromosome  distribution  ( Supplementary  Tables  8 and 9 ), intron organization ( Supplementary Tables 10 and 11 ), domain composition  ( Supplementary  Tables  12-17 ),  GO  annotation ( Supplementary  Tables  18 and 19; Supplementary  Figure  5 ) and protein properties, including the presence of signal peptides and transmembrane helices in the PKs, their estimated molecular weights (MWs), theoretical isoelectric points (pIs), and subcellular localizations  ( Supplementary  Tables  20 and 21 ).  All  these attributes of PKs are summarized at subfamily level in Supplementary  Tables  22 (Sbi)  and 23 (Ssp),  with  domain composition  described  in Supplementary  Tables  24 and 25 .

## Kinase Duplication Events in Sugarcane and Sorghum

Gene  duplications  in  Sbi  and  Ssp  kinases  were  investigated using MCScanX. We identified numerous kinase genes (1,165 in Sbi  and  2,919  in  Ssp)  that  originated  from  dispersed  (7.73% in  Sbi  and  1.68%  in  Ssp),  proximal  (3.18%  in  Sbi  and  1.88% in Ssp), tandem (10.04% in Sbi and 8.94% in Ssp), and segmental duplications (78.97% in Sbi and 87.43% in Ssp; Supplementary Tables 26 and 27 ). Ssp PKs with origins related

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Non-RLK Group

Non-RLK Group

FIGURE 1  | Phylogenetic analyses of putative protein kinases (PKs) identified in the Saccharum spontaneum (Ssp) and Sorghum bicolor (Sbi) genomes. (A) Phylogenetic tree of the 1,210 Sbi PKs organized in 120 subfamilies represented by different colors. (B) Phylogenetic tree of the 2,919 Ssp PKs organized in 119 subfamilies. (C) Phylogenetic tree of PKs in both Sbi and Ssp.

FIGURE 2  | Descriptive analysis of kinase characteristics in Ssp (A,C) and Sbi (B,D) : chromosomal distribution, intron length and chromosomal occurrence, presence of signal peptides, molecular weights (MWs), isoelectric points (pIs), Gene Ontology (GO) terms, subcellular localization, and presence of transmembrane helices.

<!-- image -->

to  tandem  duplications  were  unevenly  distributed  across  all allele  copies  on  chromosomes  (ranging  from  two  events  on Chr4-B to 16 events on Chr3-A). All Sbi chromosomes contained PKs  that  originated  from  tandem  duplications,  ranging  from one  PK  in  chromosome  4  to  26  on  both  chromosomes  2 and  3  ( Figure 3A ).  By  analyzing  the  tandemly  duplicated  PKs within  subfamilies,  we  found  19  subfamilies  containing  PKs that originated from tandem duplication. The highest percentages

FIGURE 3  | Kinase distribution along (A) S. spontaneum and (B) S. bicolor chromosomes. For each chromosome, all genes with kinase domains are indicated on the left, and only the tandemly organized kinases are indicated on the right, colored and labeled according to the subfamily classification.

<!-- image -->

of  such  Sbi  PKs  were  found  in  the  RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-Os, RLK-Pelle\_LRR-I-1,  CMGC\_CDKL-Os,  RLK-Pelle\_LRK10L-2, and CMGC\_CK2 subfamilies ( Figure 3B ). In Ssp 64 subfamilies had  tandemly  duplicated  PKs,  and  the  five  subfamilies  with the highest percentages  were  RLK-Pelle\_RKF3,  RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-VIII-1, CAMK\_CAMK1-DCAMKL, RLK-Pelle\_LRR-XIIIb, and  TKL\_Gdt.  In  Ssp  the  distribution  of  PKs  did  not  exhibit a  clear  pattern  along  chromosomes  ( Figure  3A ).  In  Sbi,  these were  concentrated  in  subtelomeric  regions  and  were  almost nonexistent in pericentromeric regions ( Figure 3B ). This pattern was  observed  more  clearly  when  only  tandemly  distributed Sbi  PKs  were  considered.  We  also  performed  a  GO  analysis to  determine  the  categories  related  to  tandemly  duplicated kinases.  The  GO  terms  describing  the  biological  processes  of these proteins were similar between Ssp and Sbi ( Figures 4A,B ), and  considerable  correspondences  with  the  total  number  of GO  terms  related  to  the  entire  set  of  PKs  were  observed ( Supplementary  Figures  5A,B ).

Segmental  duplications  accounted  for  the  highest  percentage of  identified  duplication  types  in  both  Sbi  and  Ssp  PKs.  The highest  quantities  in  Ssp  were  observed  in  the  allelic  copies  of chromosomes  1  and  2,  which  also  contained  the  most  PKs.  In Sbi,  chromosome  1  exhibited  the  most  segmental  duplications, although  chromosome  3  had  the  most  PK  genes.  For  all  gene pairs  within  these  collinear  duplications,  we  calculated  the Ka and Ks values  to  obtain  a  time  indicator  of  these  events  and evaluated  the  primary  influence  of  PK  expansion  by  calculating the Ka / Ks ratio.  We  considered  each  gene  pair  to  be  under neutral  ( Ka / Ks =  1),  negative  ( Ka / Ks &lt;  1)  or  positive  selection ( Ka / Ks &gt;  1;  Zhang  et  al.,  2006). Ks values  were  clearly  more evenly distributed in Sbi than in Ssp ( Supplementary Figures 6A,B and Supplementary Tables 28 and 29 ), which had 1,287 (27.5%) segmentally  duplicated  PKs  with  a Ks of  &lt;  0.05.  We  used Ks values  to  estimate  the  occurrence  times  of  these  duplications; the times ranged between 0 and 230.1 million years ago (MYA) in  Ssp  with  an  average  of  45.6  MYA,  and  between  4.9  and 229.7 MYA in Sbi, with an average of 96.8 MYA. Most segmental duplications  with Ks &lt;  0.05  in  Ssp  were  estimated  to  have occurred less than 3.83 MYA. Regarding the Ka / Ks ratio, we found the largest percentage of gene pairs as likely to be under negative selection  in  both  species  ( ∼ 86%  in  Ssp  and ∼ 88%  in  Sbi).

The segmental events among alleles had different configurations,  but  in  most  duplications,  the  order  of  PKs  on one allele was retained on the other allele ( Figure 5A ). Syntenic blocks  between  chromosomes  were  much  more  frequent  in Ssp  ( Figure  5B )  than  in  Sbi  ( Figure  5C ),  mainly  due  to  the allele  specificity  of  Ssp.  The  duplication  patterns  were  similar between Ssp and Sbi, as shown in Figure 5D ,  where the kinase genomic correspondences indicate the increased synteny between the two species. In most subfamilies, the origin of most PKs was characterized by segmental duplications (109 and 115 subfamilies in Sbi and Ssp respectively; Supplementary Tables 22 and 23 ). Interestingly,  four  subfamilies  in  Ssp  and  eight  subfamilies  in Sbi  did  not  contain  any  PKs  that  originated  from  segmental duplications  ( Supplementary  Tables  22 and 23 ).

For  Ssp  we  performed  additional  analyses  to  assess  the distribution  of  kinase  copies  among  alleles  and  investigated possible  associations  among  alleles,  duplications,  and  domains ( Figure  6 ).  Each  Ssp  GM  can  have  up  to  four  allelic  copies, depending on the genomic organization of the gene. Subfamilies with larger numbers of PKs had a more dispersed organizational profile  in  terms  of  the  number  of  allelic  copies  per  GM. Subfamilies  with  fewer  GMs,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  have a uniform configuration. These subfamilies constitute the majority of  the  Ssp  kinome  [ ∼ 60% of the subfamilies  had  five  or  fewer representative  GMs,  and  33  subfamilies  ( ∼ 30%)  had  only  one GM]. Even with the few related proteins, these small subfamilies did not exhibit similar characteristics. Only three of these GMs had  copies  on  the  four  alleles,  whereas  10,  9,  and  11  GMs contained  copies  on  three  alleles,  two  alleles,  and  only  one allele  (three  in  allelic  model  A,  three  in  B,  two  in  C,  and three in D), respectively. More tandem and segmental duplications were  observed  in  subfamilies  with  more  elements,  but  this pattern  did  not  hold  for  the  quantity  of  functional  domains and  multikinase  domains  ( Figure  6 ).

## Estimates of Kinase Expression and Construction of Coexpression Networks

Quantification of kinase expression in Sbi and Ssp was performed via a  wide  variety  of  datasets  comprising  different  tissues  and genotypes. From the CDS quantifications, we separated the subset of  kinase  coding  genes. Via TPM  values,  Sbi  kinase  expression was  quantified  in  205  samples  ( Supplementary  Table  30 );  Ssp kinase expression, in 234 ( Supplementary Table 31 ). To quantify expression  at  the  subfamily  level,  the  TPM  values  for  all  PK members in a subfamily were averaged in each sample ( Supplementary Tables 32 and 33 ).  However, most experiments contained several replicates, and the sample TPM values were also averaged  to  separately  represent  the  unique  characteristics  of  a tissue from a specific genotype ( Supplementary Tables 34 and 35 ).

The expression quantification of Ssp and Sbi kinase subfamilies was visualized with a heatmap ( Figure 7 ). There was a noticeable division of the columns into five groups, as was also identified by  the  total  within  sum  of  squares  using  a  range  of  group configurations (2-10). The groups were separated into sugarcane samples from internodes and roots; Sbi samples from internodes, roots,  and spikelets; Sbi samples from epidermal tissues, seeds, and  microspores;  Sbi  and  sugarcane  samples  from  leaves  and shoots;  and  Sbi  samples  from  pollen.  The  expression  patterns of  kinase  subfamilies  were  more  similar  among  similar  tissues from different species. However, these clusters contained subdivisions  supporting  the  species  specificities.

The differences in subfamily expression profiles were investigated further. For each subfamily, we calculated the dispersion of expression among genotypes and tissues using the SD and coefficient of variation ( Supplementary  Tables  36 and 37 ).  The  divergence  of  these measures  among  tissues  was  high  in  Sbi,  as  observed  in  the heatmap  and  indicated  by  the  high  values  of  the  coefficient of  variation  (ranging  from ∼ 38  to ∼ 297%).  In  Ssp  on  the other hand, 16 subfamilies exhibited relatively uniform expression patterns  in  the  analyzed  samples  (with  coefficient  of  variation of less than  or  equal  to 20%).  This  difference  is possibly explained  by  the  greater  diversity  of  tissues  used  for  Sbi  than

FIGURE 4  | Gene Ontology (GO) categories (biological processes) related to tandemly duplicated kinases in (A) S. spontaneum and (B) Sbi. The size of the subdivisions within the blocks represents the abundance of that category in this set of kinases. The colors are related to the similarity to a representative GO annotation for the group.

<!-- image -->

for  Ssp.  To  identify  subfamilies  with  the  highest  and  lowest expression  values,  we  calculated  additional  statistical  measures to summarize the distribution of TPM values in each subfamily (i.e., minimum, maximum, mean, and 1st, 2nd, and 3rd quartiles).

We selected 12 subfamilies (10% of the dataset) with the highest and  lowest  values  of  all  these  measures.  We  considered  a subfamily  as  having  the  highest  or  lowest  expression  values  if that  subfamily  was  ranked  in  at  least  four  of  the  six  measures.

FIGURE 5  | Segmental duplication events in the Ssp and Sbi genomes, divided into (A) Ssp duplications between alleles on the same chromosome, with the colors representing the origin of the duplication (green for allele A , orange for allele B , and brown for allele C ). (B) Ssp duplications between chromosomes, excluding events between alleles on the same chromosome; and (C) Sbi duplications. The colors in (B,C) indicate the selection type of the gene pair duplication (orange indicates negative selection; light blue, positive selection; and yellow, neutral selection). (D) Representation of kinase correspondences between Sbi and Ssp., indicating the synteny relationships among these species.

<!-- image -->

We identified 8 and 12 subfamilies in Sbi and Ssp respectively, with the highest expression patterns in the dataset. Surprisingly, three of these subfamilies (CK1\_CK1, CMGC\_GSK,  and CMGC\_RCK) had the highest expression value in both species. Importantly,  in  addition  to  being  overexpressed  in  Sbi,  the members  of  the  CMGC\_GSK  subfamily  also  contain  many functional  domains,  which  might  reflect  their  high  expression. Another  overexpressed  subfamily  in  the  Sbi  kinome  (but  not in Ssp) was CMGC\_MAPK, which has previously been associated with  stress  signaling  in  Ssp  and  Sbi  (Zhang  et  al.,  2015;  Li et  al.,  2016b;  Paungfoo-Lonhienne  et  al.,  2016;  Srivastava  and Kumar, 2020; Tuleski et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). Although their expression values were significantly increased, these subfamilies  did  not  contain  the  highest  numbers  of  kinases.

Using  this  approach,  eight  and  nine  subfamilies  in  Ssp  and Sbi, respectively, with the lowest expression values were identified with  two  overlaps  (CMGC\_CDKL-Os and RLK-Pelle\_URK-3). RLK-Pelle\_URK-3  had  only  one  kinase  member  in  both  the Sbi  and  Ssp  kinomes;  however,  CMGC\_CDKL-Os  had  37  and 23  kinases  in  Ssp  and  Sbi,  respectively.  The  apparent  lack  of a  correlation  between  the  expression  values  and  the  numbers of kinases in the subfamilies was also evidenced by any combination  of  genotype/tissue  with  a  significant  Spearman correlation  coefficient  ( Supplementary  Tables  38 and 39 ).

Together,  the  dendrogram  and  the  heatmap  indicate  the presence of groups of subfamilies with high similarities, whose expression  patterns  changed  jointly  according  to  the  tissue/ genotype. Collectively considering all Sbi and Ssp quantifications,

<!-- image -->

we evaluated their similarities through correlation analysis. The strongest correlations were higher than 0.97 for the two subfamily pairs RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-Os/RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-VIIa-2 and RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-VIIa-2/RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-X.  To  complement the  assessment  of  the  similarities  in  RNA  expression  among the subfamilies, we constructed coexpression networks for each species  based  on  the  expression  correlation  among  samples  in each subfamily ( Figure 8 ). Each node in the network represents

FIGURE 7  | RNA expression profiles of S. spontaneum and S. bicolor , shown on a heatmap indicating the average sample values of different combinations of genotypes and tissues (columns) and considering the organization of kinase subfamilies (rows).

<!-- image -->

a  different  subfamily  (the  node  sizes  represent  the  mean  of the expression values within the subfamily), and each connection has a minimum Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.6 (the edge sizes  represent  the  degree  of  the  correlation).  Based  on  the network structure, we evaluated the presence of cohesive clusters formed  by  correlated  subfamilies  using  a  network  community detection approach. In the Sbi network ( Figure 8A ), we identified four different modules with 87, 15, 3, and 9 elements.

FIGURE 8  | Coexpression networks for Sbi and Ssp kinase subfamilies. Each node corresponds to a different subfamily, its size corresponds to the average expression value for all kinases within the subfamily in different samples, and its color corresponds to the hub score and ranges from beige to dark green. Each edge corresponds to a correlation with a Pearson correlation coefficient of at least 0.6. The correlation strength is represented by the edge's width and the edge betweenness score is represented by the color (ranging from black to light blue, with light blue representing the highest values). (A) Sbi network with the background colored according to the community detection analysis. (B) Sbi network indicating the similarities with the Ssp network in red. (C) Ssp network with community structure information. (D) Ssp network indicating the similarities with the Sbi network in red.

<!-- image -->

Four modules were also identified in the Ssp network ( Figure  8C ),  but  the  distribution  of  the  elements  differed  (83, 13,  8,  and  2).  In  both  networks,  the  remaining  subfamilies (six  in  the  Sbi  network  and  13  in  the  Ssp  network)  were identified  as  disconnected  elements,  and  there  was  no  evident similarity  between  communities  ( Supplementary  Figure  7; Supplementary  Tables  40 and 41 ).

The  Sbi  and  Ssp  networks  exhibited  many  different  forms and  structures; however,  by  highlighting the  connections  in common  between  such  networks  ( Figures  8B,D ),  we  observed a similar substructure between representations. The main network components  were  connected  by  this  core  structure,  indicating the  strongest  correlations  between  kinase  subfamilies.  The  Ssp network  ( Figure  8D )  contained  an  edge  that  clearly  separates the  network  into  two  components;  interestingly,  this  edge  also belonged  to  the  common  structure.  By  coloring  the  network edges  according  to  the  betweenness  measure  ( Figures  8A,B ), we defined  the  connections  between  subfamilies  that  were  most likely to represent vulnerabilities in the networks, possibly indicating influential subfamilies in this complex system. The most important connections  were  related  to  the  subfamily  pairs  CAMK\_CDPK/ RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VI-2  and  CAMK\_CDPK/CMGC\_RCK  in  Sbi, and to RLK-Pelle\_L-LEC/RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VIII-1, RLK-Pelle\_

CR4L/RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VIII-1,  and  RLK-Pelle\_CR4L/RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-Xb-1  in  Ssp  ( Supplementary  Tables  42 and 43 ).

The most influential subfamilies in the networks were defined by  ranking  the  nodes  according  to  their  hub  scores,  which were used to color the nodes in the network, and highest hub scores denote kinase subfamilies with the most connections ( Supplementary  Figures  8, 9; Supplementary  Tables  40 and 41 ).  The  top  five  scores  belonged to the subfamilies RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-III, RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-XII-1,  CMGC\_CDK-CRK7-CDK9, CMGC\_GSK,  and  RLK-Pelle\_Extensin  in Ssp., and to the Unknown  category,  RLK-Pelle\_LRR-XV,  CMGC\_GSK,  STE\_ STE20-Fray, and CAMK\_OST1L  in  Sbi.  Additionally, high expression  values  in  subfamilies  did  not  indicate  increased  hub scores  ( Figure  8 ).

## DISCUSSION

Sugarcane possesses one of the most complex genomes known among  crops  (De  Souza  Barbosa  et  al.,  2020).  Only  in  2018, modern  technologies  enabled  the  assembly  of  a  chromosomeand  allele-level  genome  of  an  Ssp  clone  (Zhang  et  al.,  2018). This  study  paved  the  way  for  several  comprehensive  analyses

of gene families in the species (Hu et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a,b,c; Zhang et al., 2019b; Huang et al., 2020; Li et al.,  2020;  Su  et  al.,  2020a).  Here,  we  analyzed  the  kinome of not only sugarcane but also sorghum, a close diploid relative. Studies  estimate  that  the Saccharum and Sorghum lineages diverged 4.6-5.4 MYA (Kim et al., 2014). After diverging from Miscanthus 3.1-4.6  MYA  (Kim  et  al.,  2014),  the Saccharum lineage experienced at least  two  rounds  of  whole-genome duplication  (WGD;  Zhang  et  al.,  2018),  whereas  Sbi  remained diploid. Therefore, sorghum  genomic  resources have been extensively  employed  in  sugarcane  studies  (Okura  et  al.,  2016; Mancini  et  al.,  2018;  Bedre  et  al.,  2019).  As  the  genomes  of both  species  are  now  available,  comparisons  of  the  diversity, organization  and  expression  of  PKs  between  the  two  species enable us to perform in-depth explorations of the evolutionary history  of  these  proteins.

## Expansion and Diversification of Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes

Lehti-Shiu and Shiu (2012) indicated that substantial numerical variations  in  the  PK  superfamily  exist  among  plant  species; however, this variation could be overestimated due to differences in  the  completeness  of  the  genomic  assemblies.  Moreover, the  estimates  presented  by  this  and  other  studies  (Singh et  al.,  2014;  Wei  et  al.,  2014;  Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Zhu  et  al., 2018a,b)  indicated  a  number  of  PKs  in  Sbi  (1,210)  very similar to those of other Poaceae species, which range between 1,041  in  Bdi  and  1,417  in  Osa  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012; Wei et al., 2014). The Ssp genome, on the other hand, contains one  of  the  largest  numbers  of  PK  genes  reported  for  any plant  species  (2,919),  ranking  below  only  the  allohexaploid genome  of Triticum  aestivum (3,269  PKs;  Yan  et  al.,  2017). However, we must consider that this identification was performed using a genome with allele-level information; when only  Ssp  GMs  (i.e.,  single  representatives  of  all  copies  of  a gene)  were  analyzed,  we  found  a  much  lower  number  of PK  genes  (1,345),  which  is  also  within  the  range  of  PKs  in other Poaceae species. This discrepancy reinforces the hypothesis  of  Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu  (2012)  that  the  expansion of  PK  genes  is  directly  related  to  recent  WGD  events,  a suggestion  that  was  made  considering  that  paleopolyploid species,  such  as  soybean,  have  larger  repertoires  of  PKs. Indeed,  because  soybean's  duplication  events  occurred  much earlier than sugarcane's (having occurred ∼ 13-59  MYA; Schmutz  et  al.,  2010),  its  homologous  chromosomes  are  not treated  as  allelic  copies.  Therefore,  it  is  only  natural  that more PK genes were identified in the two kinomes compiled for  Sbi,  namely,  2,099  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012)  and  2,166 (Liu  et  al.,  2015)  PKs,  whereas  Ssp  which  underwent  very recent  WGDs,  contained  many  fewer  PK  genes  when  allelic copies  were  considered.

In Sbi, PK genes were more commonly located in subtelomeric regions. This pattern was even more evident when only tandemly duplicated PKs were considered; similar (though less pronounced) patterns were observed in the kinomes of soybean (Liu  et  al.,  2015), T.  aestivum (Yan  et  al.,  2017), Gossypium raimondii , and Gossypium barbadense (Yan et al., 2018).

Yan  et  al.  (2017)  noted  that  this  pattern  is  consistent  with the higher gene and expressed sequence tag densities in distal regions of chromosomes of T.  aestivum and inferred that such a location pattern could indicate chromosomal rearrangements. Our findings are equally compatible with the genomic landscape of  sorghum:  in  this  species,  the  density  of  genes  -  especially paralogs  -  is  markedly  higher  in  chromosome  extremities, whereas pericentromeric regions are very rich in long terminal repeat retrotransposons (Paterson et al., 2009; Mace and Jordan, 2011).  The  gene  density  in  Ssp  on  the  other  hand,  is  less skewed toward subtelomeric regions (Zhang et al., 2018), which might  explain  why  we  did  not  observe  such  a  clear  pattern for PK gene distribution in the species. An analogous observation was made by Zhang et al. (2019a) when comparing the genomic organization  of  Sbi, S.  officinarum ,  and S.  robustum .  These authors  note  that,  despite  observing  considerable  collinearity between species, genes that were widely dispersed in Saccharum linkage groups were much more tightly clustered in subtelomeric regions  on  Sbi  chromosomes.  The  same  pattern  is  evident  in the synteny plot between the Sbi and Ssp kinomes ( Figure 5D ): While  many  Sbi  PK  genes  are  present  in  Ssp  they  are  much more  widely distributed along chromosomes  in  Ssp. The dispersion  of  Ssp  kinase  genes  between  chromosomes  and allelic copies was also relatively balanced and  somewhat proportional  to  chromosomal  length.  Overall,  this  finding  is similar to the patterns of kinase genes  obtained  for rice (Dardick  et  al.,  2007),  pineapple,  and  grapevine  (Zhu  et  al., 2018a,b),  even  though  genes  are  more  unevenly  distributed along  chromosomes.

Differences in PK  composition may  lead to different functional profiles. Similarly, structural divergences may arise at  distinct  points  in  evolutionary  history  (Teich  et  al.,  2007; Liu et al., 2015), contributing to different domain organizations and,  subsequently,  to  diverse  functions  (Xu  et  al.,  2012). Although  PKs  in  the  same  subfamily  have  similar  intron distribution profiles in wheat  (Yan  et al., 2017), several compositional differences were detected in the soybean kinome (Liu  et  al.,  2015);  we  also  detected  such  differences  in  Ssp and Sbi. In the Sbi kinome, the distribution of introns across subfamilies was more organized than that in the Ssp kinome, i.e.,  the  distribution  of  introns  in  Ssp  was  more  variable among  the  PKs  subfamilies.  This  finding  indicates  the  more recent  intron/exon  reorganization  of  Ssp  PKs  and  that  gene reorganization might have occurred after these species diverged, a hypothesis that can be investigated for a deeper understanding of PKs  evolution  in  Saccharinae.  This  data  also benefits further  comparisons  among  subfamilies  and  gene  evolution within them. The NEK, CK1\_CK1-Pl,  PEK\_GCN2,  and TKL\_CTR1-DRK-2 families had the most prominent structural organization  in  both  Sbi  and  Ssp.  All  of  these  families  play essential  roles  in  cellular  processes  (Moniz  et  al.,  2011;  Tan and  Xue,  2014;  Takatani  et  al.,  2015;  Varberg  et  al.,  2018; Karpov et al., 2019; Pei et al., 2019), which requires a higher level  of  organization.  In  contrast  with  the  highly  organized gene  profile,  Ssp  PK  subfamilies  had  the  largest  number  of domains, corroborating the most recent possible gene organization  of  PKs.

The number of potential PK genes with a domain coverage less  than  50%  can  indicate  that  they  represent  atypical  kinases or  pseudogenes  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012;  Liu  et  al.,  2015). For  Sbi,  this  criterion  resulted  in  the  exclusion  of ∼ 3%  of sequences  (57  genes)  with  significant  correspondences  with PKs.  In  Ssp  however,  almost  20%  of  the  initially  identified PKs  were  discarded  (735  genes).  Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu  (2012) found that  9.6%  of  all  kinases  initially  identified  in  25  species exhibited  a  domain  coverage  of  less  than  50%,  and  this  value varied  considerably  in  later  studies  that  employed  the  same methodology.  We  can  also  speculate  regarding  the  influence of polyploidization on  the pseudogenization  of PK  genes. Although no kinomes have been published for other autopolyploid species, similar findings were reported in allopolyploids.  The  kinome  of  the  allohexaploid T.  aestivum contains ∼ 22%  atypical  kinases,  whereas  the  kinomes  of  two of  its  diploid  parental  species, Triticum  urartu and Aegilops tauschii ,  contain ∼ 16  and ∼ 14%  atypical  kinases,  respectively. Similarly, the kinomes of G. raimondii and Gossypium arboretum contain ∼ 4  and ∼ 9%  atypical  kinases,  respectively,  whereas in  the  kinomes  of  the  allotetraploids Gossypium  hirsutum and G.  barbadense , ∼ 12%  of  PKs  have  such  characteristics.  The larger numbers  of  kinase  genes with atypical  domains  in polyploid  genomes  might  have  resulted  from  more  frequent pseudogenization events in these species and subsequent WGD, a  long-proposed  consequence  of  gene  duplication  and  thus  of polyploidization  (Magadum  et  al.,  2013).

Overall, the Ssp and Sbi kinomes exhibited similar duplication  patterns;  in  both  species,  the  most  common  type of  PK  duplication  was  segmental  duplications,  followed  by tandem  duplications.  These  duplication  events  are  usually reported  as  the  two  main  contributors  to  PK  expansion  in the genomes of several other species, especially in the RLK-Pelle superfamily  (Champion  et  al.,  2004;  Dardick  et  al.,  2007; Wei et al.,  2014;  Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Dezhsetan,  2017;  Zhu  et  al., 2018a,b).  Gene  retention  by  tandem  duplication  in  kinases has  already  been  identified,  with  very  high  rates  in  several plants (Lehti-Shiu and Shiu, 2012), and considerable correlation with different kinds of stress (Freeling, 2009). The association of  PK  expansion  through  such  events  with  defense  response and  signaling  pathways  has  been  widely  reported  in  kinome studies  (Zulawski  et  al.,  2014;  Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Yan  et  al., 2018;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b),  with  these  events  being  more pronounced  in  the  RLK-Pelle  group.  In  the  Ssp  and  Sbi kinomes,  we  found  several  subfamilies  in  this  group  with tandem  duplications  (mostly  in  LRR  families).  By  analyzing GO  biological process categories related to these events ( Figure  3 ),  we  found  a  considerable  frequency  of  categories related to the defense response; however, other general categories were  also  frequent,  which  is  explained  by  the  numerous processes related to these subfamilies. Interestingly, in RKF-3 (in the RLK-Pelle group) in Ssp all duplications were associated with tandem events, and members of this family have already been  linked  to  stress  responses  and  extracellular  signaling (Huang  et  al.,  2014;  Vaid  et  al.,  2016).  Even  with  this  high similarity,  several  differences  in  the  distribution  of  tandemly organized  genes  within  subfamilies  were  found  between  the

Ssp and Sbi kinomes. These species- and chromosomal regionspecific  organizational  characteristics  were  previously  noted by  Yan  et  al.  (2018)  in  a  comparison  of  cotton  kinomes. With respect to genome organization in Ssp and Sbi, different forms of tandem events have already been found (Wang et al., 2010),  with  specific  gene  organization  patterns  within  each genome  (Zhang  et  al.,  2018).

Segmental duplication events were also the major contributors to  PK  expansion  in  other  species;  in  the  soybean  kinome, these  events  accounted  for  the  origin  of  more  than  70%  of the  PKs  (Liu  et  al.,  2015);  in  grapevine,  they  were  estimated to  be  responsible  for  the  origin  of ∼ 30%  of  the  kinases  and were  thought  to  be  especially  relevant  in  the  expansion  of  the RLK-Pelle family (Zhu et al., 2018b). The most striking duplication-related difference between the Ssp and Sbi kinomes was  the  distribution  of  the  rate  of  nonsynonymous  mutations ( Ks ),  which  was  used  to  estimate  the  time  of  occurrence  of segmental  duplications.  While  the  range  of  Sbi  PK Ks values was comparatively wide, peaking at 0.65-0.85 ( Supplementary  Figure  6B ),  the Ks values  of  Ssp  exhibited  a very  prominent  peak  between  0  and  0.05  range;  additionally, the  further  distribution  of Ks was  somewhat  similar  to  that in  Sbi  ( Supplementary  Figure  6A ).  Based  on  the  clock-like rates  of  synonymous  substitutions,  we  estimated  that  the  time of  occurrence  of  this  large  number  of  segmental  duplications with Ks &lt;  0.05  was  less  than  3.8  MYA.  Thus,  we  postulate that  the Ks distribution  in  Ssp  is  a  consequence  of  the  recent polyploidization events in sugarcane; this hypothesis is supported by recent indications that the Saccharum -specific WGDs occurred in  the  last  3.1-4.6  million  years  (Kim  et  al.,  2014;  Zhang et al., 2018). This is further reinforced by the findings reported in Gossypium spp.  kinomes;  a  profile  of Ks distributions  very similar  to  that  in  Ssp  was  observed  in  the  allotetraploids G. hirsutum and G.  barbadense but  not  in  its  diploid  relatives (Yan  et  al.,  2018),  strengthening  the  connection  of  this  profile to  WGD  events.

## Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes' Expression Patterns

Several RNA-Seq experiments were used to estimate the expression  patterns  of  kinase  subfamilies  across  a  considerable range  of  tissues  and  genotypes.  Due  to  the  similar  expression patterns within subfamilies (Liu et al., 2015) and the possibility of  detecting  clearer  expression  patterns  in  different  subfamilies than at the individual gene level, expression analysis  was performed, combining expression levels of genes from subfamilies, instead  of  individual  genes.  The  differences  among  samples were more evident when separated by tissue instead of genotype and species ( Figure 7 ), possibly because of the strong conservation of  PKs  and  their  importance  in  several  fundamental  biological processes.  In  addition,  as  Liu  et  al.  (2015)  suggested,  we  also recognized that the Ssp and Sbi kinomes' expression is shaped by the physiological characteristics of these species. The highest expression levels were found for members of the CMGC group in  both  the  Sbi  and  Ssp  kinomes.  Additionally,  in  the  AGC, CAMK,  and  CK1  groups,  we  found  high  expression  levels  in several  subfamilies.  These  findings  were  previously  reported

in  other  plants,  suggesting  an  association  of  these  groups  with developmental processes (Liu et al.,  2015;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b). Interestingly,  even  though  RLK-Pelle  subfamilies  account  for the  largest  number  of  PKs  among  the  kinomes,  they  were  not among  the  top  overexpressed  subfamilies.

Despite  having  only  one  kinase  member  in  Ssp  and  Sbi, the AGC\_PKA-PKG subfamily showed one of the highest average expression values across Ssp tissues. In addition to the unremarkable expression of RLK-Pelle members, the high AGC\_PKA-PKG  expression  corroborates  the  observation  that the  expression  in  the  Ssp  and  Sbi  kinomes  was  not  related  to the  number  of  family  members  across  families  and  groups.  If we  assume  that  PK  subfamilies  might  have  increased  in  size through  duplication  events,  this  might  be  a  case  of  dosage balance,  a  phenomenon  in  which  the  function  of  regulatory genes  is  sensitive  to  a  stoichiometric  equilibrium  (Birchler  and Veitia,  2014).  Thus,  PK  families  composed  of  more  members (which  survived  duplications  and  thus  present  more  copies) have  a  tendency  toward  lower  average  expression,  as  has  been demonstrated in other plants (Birchler and Veitia, 2012). Additionally,  AGC\_PKA-PKG  subfamily  has  been  reported  as broadly  important  in  both  Ssp  and  Sbi.  In  Ssp  studies  have demonstrated  the  association  of  its  members  with  signaling pathways  (Kasirajan  et  al.,  2020),  cell  proliferation  (Li  et  al., 2016b), infection responses (Santa Brigida et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018),  hormone signal transduction in response to drought (Li et  al.,  2016a),  and  pathways  related  to  sucrose  storage  and photosynthesis (Hoang et al., 2017; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017).  In  Sbi,  the  importance  of  this  family  is  also  linked  with stress and signal responses (Li et al., 2018; Parra-Londono et al., 2018;  Nagaraju  et  al.,  2020;  Vikal  et  al.,  2020).  Therefore,  these insights  into  expression  patterns  constitute  a  valuable  reservoir of information for analyzing the importance of Ssp and Sbi kinases.

The final analysis performed using RNA-Seq aimed to establish closer  relationships  among  kinase  subfamilies  in  Sbi  and  Ssp through  coexpression  networks,  enabling  biological  inferences using  connection  patterns.  The  gene  coexpression  networks were  constructed  with  pairwise  correlations  (similarity  scores) from the gene expression quantification data (Serin et al., 2016). Pearson  correlation  coefficients  were  used  because  of  their reasonable  performance  in  RNA-Seq  datasets  (Ballouz  et  al., 2015). Moreover, as Liu et al. (2015) suggested, we constructed the networks based on subfamily relationships instead of single genes  because  of  the  enhanced  functional  interpretability  and general inferences allowed by this approach. Complex networks have been widely applied to visualize complex biological systems (Barabási,  2016),  and  constitute  a  powerful  tool  for  modeling gene  interactions  (Zhao  et  al.,  2010).  For  kinase  subfamily representations, these networks can facilitate the interpretation of  relevant  relationships  among  sets  of  kinases  and  provide insights  into  the  interactions  among  metabolic  mechanisms. Such applications are possible because similar expression patterns on  genes  belonging  to  the  same  pathways  reflect  the  network structure  (Lee  et  al.,  2015),  thus  providing  a  tool  to  model these complex molecular interactions (Ficklin and Feltus, 2011).

Together with the network representations, we used community  detection  methodologies  to  identify  modules  of cohesive elements, which possibly indicate more strongly interconnected metabolic relationships (Mitra et al., 2013; Mall et al., 2017; Zhang and Yin, 2020). This structural organization constitutes  a  reservoir  of  genetic  information  among  kinomes and provides important insights into how  PK  subfamilies biologically interact. When some subfamilies without a significant amount  of  relationships  with  other  elements  were  excluded [nine Sbi subfamilies in communities 3, 4, and 6-10 ( Supplementary Table 40 ) and 13 Ssp subfamilies in communities 3-9, 11-13, and 15-17 ( Supplementary Table 41 )], the network structures  ( Figure 8 )  indicated  that  all  of  the  subfamilies  were interconnected, considering the nonrandom dependencies across subfamilies  captured  by  the  established  correlation  coefficient threshold  (Ficklin  and  Feltus,  2011).  Even  though  they  have specific  functions,  all  kinase  subfamilies  play  roles  in  several common metabolic  processes,  and  this  commonality  is  clearly reflected  in  the  network  structures.

In addition, considering the roles of  PKs  in  metabolic signaling and  stress responses, the organization of several subfamilies is reasonably conserved among different plant species (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012).  By  comparing  the  Sbi  and  Ssp networks, we identified a substantial core of similarity between the subfamily interactions in these species, which might indicate several  analogous  expression  profiles  ( Figure  7 ).  In  addition to  the  comparison  of  network  connectivities,  other  topological characteristics  were  used  to  identify  important  features  in  the organization  of  kinome  subfamilies.  Hub  and  betweenness measures  were  calculated  to  supply  evidence  regarding  how specific  subfamilies  are  important  in  most  metabolic  processes involving  kinases.

Within a network structure, elements with the most connections are called hubs (Barabási, 2016). These nodes have been  used  to  identify  functionally  critical  components  and  as an additional approach to describe the network structure (Hong et al.,  2013;  Azuaje,  2014;  van  Dam  et  al.,  2018).  In  the constructed networks, the hub nodes indicate kinase subfamilies with the most correlations, which might represent sets of kinases with influential roles in diverse  metabolic  mechanisms  in kinomes. Interestingly, the Sbi and Ssp networks did not exhibit high overlap of hub nodes. This observation provides evidence that  although  there  are  several  similarities  among  the  kinase expression  profiles  in  the  species,  and  the  same  biological cascades are activated, as indicated by the GO  analyses ( Supplementary  Figure  5 ), the mechanism  by  which the expression balance is achieved is species-specific. In fact, previous studies  in  polyploids  have  shown  that  this  balancing  varies even  among  lines  of  the  same  species  (Mutti  et  al.,  2017).

In  both  Sbi  and  Ssp  networks  and  those  constructed  in other  kinome  studies  (Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018b), different  members  of  RLK-Pelle  (mostly  those  in  the  LRR  and RLCK families) were identified as hubs. Considering the described abundance  of  these  families,  their  tandem  duplications,  and related  functional  implications,  the  strong  influence  of  such nodes on the correlations among kinase subfamilies was expected. CMGC group subfamilies were also identified as hub elements, as  observed  in  the  soybean  kinome  (Liu  et  al.,  2015).  In  the sugarcane network, the GSK and CDK families had a considerable

number of connections, which is clearly explained by the very high number of pathways in which their members are involved, as previously noted. Additionally, CDK has already been found to  be  related  to  stress  signaling  in  Ssp  (Patade  et  al.,  2011) and  Sbi  (Challa  and  Neelapu,  2018).  In  Sbi,  DYRK  also  had a  high  node  degree.  Interestingly,  members  of  this  family  have already been found to be related to the suppression of photosynthesis activity  (Kimura and Ishikawa, 2018); thus, the importance and impact of this family among kinases is evident. Among  the  other  hubs,  the  STE  group  (STE20  family)  was also important in the Ssp and Sbi networks, which can be explained by the high number of biological cascades related to  this  subfamily  (Xiong  et  al.,  2016).

Several  factors  can  explain  why  a  subfamily  constitutes  a hub  in  our  constructed  networks,  such  as  a  high  expression level  (CMGC\_GSK,  CAMK\_OST1L,  CK1\_CK1,  and  CMGC\_ DYRK-YAK), a large number of subfamily members (RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-III), the occurrence of tandem duplications (IRE1), a more structured gene organization considering intron-exon structures (RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-XII-1,  RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VI-1,  and  CMGC\_ GSK), and the presence of diverse functional domains (RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-III, CMGC\_CDK-CRK7-CDK9, and RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VII-1) or multikinase domains (AGC\_RSK-2, RLK-Pelle\_LRR-III, and CMGC\_CDK-CRK7-CDK9).  However,  we  did  not  observe  a consistent feature profile required for a subfamily to be considered a  hub.  Evidence  supports  the  hubs'  importance;  however,  the real  reasons  for  their  key  importance  within  these  structures are  likely  to  be  linked  with  functional  properties,  as  widely discussed  in  other  coexpression  studies  (Goel  et  al.,  2018;  Tai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020).

In addition to hub descriptions, edge betweenness measures also  have  high  interpretability  considering  the  complex  system modeled  by  the  networks.  These  calculations  are  based  on properties from the entire network (Dunn et al., 2005), exploiting the network flow and identifying possible essential interactions for  the  visual  configuration  (van  Dam  et  al.,  2018).  In  both the  Sbi  and  Ssp  networks,  a  clearly  separated  group  of  PKs that  was  connected  with  the  other  elements  by  only  one  or a  few  connections  was  observed.  This  network  configuration might indicate important relationships among kinase subfamilies, providing  evidence  indicating  how  these  specific  subfamilies can interconnect. In Ssp the most critical connections identified by betweenness calculations were found in the RLK-Pelle\_L-LEC/ RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VIII-1 and RLK-Pelle\_CR4L/RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-Xb-1  subfamilies.  These  nodes  are  members  of  families with  undeniable  importance,  as  seen  in  the  network  structure. The bridges in these kinase-kinase interactions can be explained by  the  large  number  of  members  that  can  act  in  a  connected manner,  which  is  less  evident  in  other  subfamilies.  However, as  observed  in  the  hub  configurations,  these  structures  are more evidently linked with functional roles, such as interconnected  signaling  pathways.

In the Sbi network, on the other hand, the highest betweenness values  were  found  in  the  CAMK\_CDPK/RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VI-2 and CAMK\_CDPK/CMGC\_RCK subfamilies. Interestingly, CAMK\_CDPK  genes have been extensively indicated to be  located  at  important  genomic  regions  regulating  growth, development,  and  resistance  mechanisms  to  several  types  of abiotic and biotic stresses in both Sbi (Pestenácz and Erdei, 1996; Nhiri  et  al.,  1998;  Jain  et  al.,  2008;  Li  et  al.,  2010;  Monreal et  al.,  2013;  Usha  Kiranmayee  et  al.,  2017)  and  Ssp  (Li  et  al., 2016b;  Marquardt  et  al.,  2017;  Ling  et  al.,  2018;  Dharshini et  al.,  2020;  Srivastava  and  Kumar,  2020;  Su  et  al.,  2020b), further  supporting  the  association  of  functional  characteristics in  the  network  structure.

## CONCLUSION

This  study  provided  an  extensive  reservoir  of  genetic  and molecular  information  for  both  Sbi  and  Ssp.  Considering  the incontestable importance of kinases in several essential biological processes,  the  identification,  categorization,  and  analysis  of the kinomes of these species resulted in an important compendium  of  knowledge  for  use  in  further  studies.  Clear similarities were found in protein properties, domain compositions,  genomic  organization,  expression  profiles,  and subfamily interactions. However, we also observed pronounced differences  in  duplication  events,  which  probably  arose  from Ssp  recent  WGDs,  facilitating  understanding  of  how  the  Sbi and  Ssp  kinomes  have  evolved  considering  this  vast  protein superfamily.  Through  coexpression  networks  we  could  supply insights  into  kinase  subfamilies'  interactions  in  Sbi  and  Spp; we could define a common interactional structure, but observed substantial  differences  on  the  subfamilies'  communications, quantified  with  community  structures,  hub,  and  betweenness scores. Further assessments of elements with relevant influence over the network architecture could highlight subfamilies with direct influence over the cascade of kinase cellular mechanisms. More  detailed  studies  on  these  groups  should  contribute  to the  understanding of molecular signaling and stress responses in  Sbi  and  Ssp.

## DATA  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT

The  datasets  presented  in  this  study  can  be  found  in  online repositories. The names of the repositories and accession numbers can be found at: National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, PRJEB38368,  PRJNA681593,  PRJEB41560  and  PRJEB40481.

## AUTHOR  CONTRIBUTIONS

AA and RP performed all  analyses  and  wrote  the  manuscript. AG, FC, and GH assisted in processing the sugarcane RNA-Seq data,  and  together  with  CC-S,  MM,  and  DS,  were  responsible for  the  sugarcane  RNA-Seq  experiments.  MMC  assisted  in  the functional  analyses  of  the  kinase  subfamilies.  LS  contributed to  the  identification  of  the  kinases.  JN  assisted  in  the  kinase categorization.  LP ,  ML,  MSC,  and  TB  were  responsible  for  the sugarcane field experiments. MQ assisted in the network analysis. WP assisted in the pipeline definition and kinase categorization.

GM and AS conceived  the  project.  All  authors  contributed  to the  article  and  approved  the  submitted  version.

## FUNDING

This  work  was  supported  by  grants  from  the  Fundação  de Amparo à Pesquisa de do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP 2020/07434-0, 2015/22993-7, 2008/52197-4, and 2005/55258-6), the Conselho  Nacional  de  Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq 313,426/2018-0 and 434,886/20181),  and  the  Coordenação  de  Aperfeiçoamento  de  Pessoal  de Nível  Superior  (CAPES  -  Computational  Biology  Programme and  Financial  Code  001).  AA  received  a  PhD  fellowship  from FAPESP  (2019/03232-6).  RP  received  an  MSc  fellowship  from CAPES (88887.177386/2018-00) and MSc and PhD fellowships from  FAPESP  (2018/18588-8  and  2019/21682-9).  GH  received a  PhD  fellowship  from  CAPES  (88882.160212/2017-01).  CC-S received  a  PD  fellowship  from  FAPESP  (2015/16399-5).  MM received a PD fellowship from FAPESP (2014/11482-9). DS  received  a  PhD  fellowship  from  FAPESP  (2010/50119-6).

## REFERENCES

- Ahuja,  I.,  de  Vos,  R.  C.  H.,  Bones,  A.  M.,  and  Hall,  R.  D.  (2010).  Plant molecular stress responses face climate change. Trends Plant Sci. 15, 664-674. doi:  10.1016/j.tplants.2010.08.002
- Andrews,  S.  (2010).  FastQC:  a  quality  control  tool  for  high  throughput sequence data. Available at: http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/ projects/fastqc  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Ashburner,  M.,  Ball,  C.  A.,  Blake,  J.  A.,  Botstein,  D.,  Butler,  H.,  Cherry,  J.  M., et  al.  (2000).  Gene  ontology:  tool  for  the  unification  of  biology. Nat.  Genet. 25,  25-29.  doi:  10.1038/75556
- Azuaje,  F.  J.  (2014).  Selecting  biologically  informative  genes  in  co-expression networks with a centrality score. Biol. Direct 9:12. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-9-12
- Bairoch,  A.,  and  Apweiler,  R.  (2000).  The  SWISS-PROT  protein  sequence database  and  its  supplement  TrEMBL  in  2000. Nucleic Acids  Res. 28,  45-48. doi:  10.1093/nar/28.1.45
- Ballouz,  S.,  Verleyen,  W .,  and  Gillis,  J.  (2015).  Guidance  for  RNA-seq  coexpression network construction and analysis: safety in numbers. Bioinformatics 31,  2123-2130.  doi:  10.1093/bioinformatics/btv118
- Barabási, A. (2016). Network science . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Bedre, R., Irigoyen, S., Schaker, P . D. C., Monteiro-Vitorello, C. B., Da Silva, J. A., and  Mandadi,  K.  K.  (2019).  Genome-wide  alternative  splicing  landscapes modulated  by  biotrophic  sugarcane  smut  pathogen. Sci.  Rep. 9:8876.  doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-45184-1
- Birchler,  J.  A.,  and  Veitia,  R.  A.  (2012).  Gene  balance  hypothesis:  connecting issues  of  dosage  sensitivity  across  biological  disciplines. Proc.  Natl.  Acad. Sci.  U.  S.  A. 109,  14746-14753.  doi:  10.1073/pnas.1207726109
- Birchler,  J.  A.,  and  Veitia,  R.  A.  (2014).  The  gene  balance  hypothesis:  dosage effects in plants. Methods Mol. Biol. 1112, 25-32. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-773-0\_2
- Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M., and Usadel, B. (2014). Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for  Illumina  sequence  data. Bioinformatics 30,  2114-2120.  doi:  10.1093/ bioinformatics/btu170
- Brandes,  U.  (2001).  A  faster  algorithm  for  betweenness  centrality. J.  Math. Sociol. 25,  163-177.  doi:  10.1080/0022250X.2001.9990249
- Carraro,  D.  M.,  Lambais,  M.  R.,  and  Carrer,  H.  (2001).  In  silico  characterization and expression analyses of sugarcane putative sucrose non-fermenting-1 (SNF1) related kinases. Genet. Mol. Biol. 24, 35-41. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572001000100006
- Challa, S., and Neelapu, N. R. (2018). 'Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for abiotic stress tolerance in plants' in Biochemical, physiological and molecular avenues  for  combating  abiotic  stress  tolerance  in  plants .  ed.  S.  H.  Wani (Amsterdam,  Netherlands:  Elsevier),  135-150.

LS received an undergraduate fellowship from FAPESP (2019/19340-2).  TB  received  a  PhD  fellowship  from  FAPESP (2010/50091-4).  AS  received  a  research  fellowship  from  CNPq.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  Fundação  de  Amparo  à Pesquisa  de  do  Estado  de  São  Paulo  (FAPESP),  the  Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), and the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior  (CAPES).

## SUPPLEMENTARY  MATERIAL

The  Supplementary  Figures  and  Tables  for  this  article  have been  deposited  in  Figshare  (https://figshare.com/):  https://doi. org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5122460.v2. The Supplementary Results section  can  be  found  online  at:  https://www.frontiersin.org/ articles/10.3389/fpls.2021.668623/full#supplementary-material

- Champion,  A.,  Kreis,  M.,  Mockaitis,  K.,  Picaud,  A.,  and  Henry,  Y.  (2004). Arabidopsis kinome:  after  the  casting. Funct.  Integr.  Genom. 4,  163-187.  doi: 10.1007/s10142-003-0096-4
- Clayton,  W .  D.  (1987).  ' Andropogoneae'  in Grass  systematics  and  evolution .  ed. T. R. Soderstrom (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institutional Press), 307-309. Conesa,  A.,  Götz,  S.,  García-Gómez,  J.  M.,  Terol,  J.,  Talón,  M.,  and  Robles,  M. (2005).  Blast2GO:  a  universal  tool  for  annotation,  visualization  and  analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21,  3674-3676. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/bti610
- Correr,  F.  H.,  Hosaka,  G.  K.,  Barreto,  F.  Z.,  Valadão,  I.  B.,  Balsalobre,  T.  W .  A., Furtado,  A.,  et  al.  (2020).  Differential  expression  in  leaves  of Saccharum genotypes  contrasting  in  biomass  production  provides  evidence  of  genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC  Genomics 21:673. doi: 10.1186/ s12864-020-07091-y
- Csardi,  G.,  and  Nepusz,  T.  (2006).  The  igraph  software  package  for  complex network  research. InterJ.  Complex  Syst. 1695,  1-9.
- Dai,  A.  (2013).  Increasing  drought  under  global  warming  in  observations  and models. Nat.  Clim.  Chang. 3,  52-58.  doi:  10.1038/nclimate1633
- Dardick,  C.,  Chen,  J.,  Richter,  T.,  Ouyang,  S.,  and  Ronald,  P .  (2007).  The  rice kinase database. A phylogenomic database for the rice kinome. Plant Physiol. 143,  579-586.  doi:  10.1104/pp.106.087270
- De  Souza  Barbosa,  G.  V .,  Dos  Santos,  J.  M.,  Diniz,  C.  A.,  Cursi,  D.  E.,  and Hoffmann,  H.  P.  (2020).  'Energy  cane  breeding'  in Sugarcane  biorefinery, technology  and  perspectives .  eds.  F.  Santos,  S.  Rabelo,  M.  De  Matos  and P.  Eichler  (London,  UK:  Elsevier),  103-116.
- Dezhsetan,  S.  (2017).  Genome  scanning  for  identification  and  mapping  of receptor-like  kinase  (RLK)  gene  superfamily  in Solanum tuberosum . Physiol. Mol.  Biol.  Plants 23,  755-765.  doi:  10.1007/s12298-017-0471-6
- Dharshini, S., Hoang, N. V ., Mahadevaiah, C., Padmanabhan, T. S., Alagarasan, G., Suresha, G., et al. (2020). Root transcriptome analysis of Saccharum spontaneum uncovers  key  genes  and  pathways  in  response  to  low-temperature  stress. Environ.  Exp.  Bot. 171:103935.  doi:  10.1016/j.envexpbot.2019.103935
- D'Hont, A., Ison, D., Alix, K., Roux, C., and Glaszmann, J. C. (1998). Determination of basic chromosome numbers in the genus Saccharum by  physical mapping of  ribosomal  RNA  genes. Genome 41,  221-225.  doi:  10.1139/g98-023
- Ding,  Z., Fu, L., Tan, D., Sun, X., and  Zhang,  J. (2020). An  integrative transcriptomic  and  genomic  analysis  reveals  novel  insights  into  the  hub genes and  regulatory networks  associated with rubber synthesis in H. brasiliensis . Ind.  Crop.  Prod. 153:112562.  doi:  10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112562
- Dugas,  D.  V .,  Monaco,  M.  K.,  Olson,  A.,  Klein,  R.  R.,  Kumari,  S.,  Ware,  D., et  al.  (2011).  Functional  annotation  of  the  transcriptome  of Sorghum bicolor

- in  response  to  osmotic  stress  and  abscisic  acid. BMC Genomics 12:514.  doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-514
- Dunn,  R.,  Dudbridge,  F.,  and  Sanderson,  C.  M.  (2005).  The  use  of  edgebetweenness clustering to investigate biological function in protein interaction networks. BMC  Bioinformatics 6:39.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2105-6-39
- Eddy,  S.  R.  (1998).  Profile  hidden  Markov  models. Bioinformatics 14,  755-763. doi:  10.1093/bioinformatics/14.9.755
- Edgar, R. C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and  high  throughput. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 32,  1792-1797.  doi:  10.1093/nar/ gkh340
- El-Gebali,  S.,  Mistry,  J.,  Bateman,  A.,  Eddy,  S.  R.,  Luciani,  A.,  Potter,  S.  C., et  al.  (2019).  The  Pfam  protein  families  database  in  2019. Nucleic  Acids Res. 47,  D427-D432.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gky995
- Falco, M.  C., Marbach,  P. A. S., Pompermayer,  P.,  Lopes, F. C. C.,  and Silva-Filho,  M.  C.  (2001).  Mechanisms  of  sugarcane  response  to  herbivory. Genet.  Mol.  Biol. 24,  113-122.  doi:  10.1590/S1415-47572001000100016
- FAO (2020). FAOSTAT: production sheet. Available at: http://www.fao.org/faostat/ en/#data  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Ficklin,  S.  P .,  and  Feltus,  F .  A.  (2011).  Gene  coexpression  network  alignment and  conservation  of  gene  modules  between  two  grass  species:  maize  and rice. Plant  Physiol. 156,  1244-1256.  doi:  10.1104/pp.111.173047
- Finn, R. D., Clements, J., and Eddy, S. R. (2011). HMMER web server: interactive sequence similarity searching. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, W29-W37. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkr367
- Freeling,  M.  (2009).  Bias  in  plant  gene  content  following  different  sorts  of duplication:  tandem,  whole-genome,  segmental,  or  by  transposition. Annu. Rev.  Plant  Biol. 60,  433-453.  doi:  10.1146/annurev.arplant.043008.092122
- Freeling, M., Scanlon, M.  J., and  Fowler, J. E. (2015). Fractionation  and subfunctionalization  following  genome  duplications:  mechanisms  that  drive gene  content  and  their  consequences. Curr.  Opin.  Genet.  Dev. 35,  110-118. doi:  10.1016/j.gde.2015.11.002
- Gaut, B. S., Morton, B. R., McCaig, B. C., and Clegg, M. T. (1996). Substitution rate  comparisons  between  grasses  and  palms:  synonymous  rate  differences at  the  nuclear  gene  Adh  parallel  rate  differences  at  the  plastid  gene  rbc  L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 10274-10279. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.19.10274
- Goel,  P .,  Sharma,  N.  K.,  Bhuria,  M.,  Sharma,  V .,  Chauhan,  R.,  Pathania,  S., et  al.  (2018).  Transcriptome  and  co-expression  network  analyses  identify key  genes  regulating  nitrogen  use  efficiency  in Brassica  juncea L. Sci.  Rep. 8,  1-18.  doi:  10.1038/s41598-018-25826-6
- Goodstein,  D.  M.,  Shu,  S.,  Howson,  R.,  Neupane,  R.,  Hayes,  R.  D.,  Fazo,  J., et  al.  (2012).  Phytozome:  a  comparative  platform  for  green  plant  genomics. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40,  D1178-D1186.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr944
- Gregory, P. J., Johnson, S. N., Newton, A. C., and Ingram, J. S. (2009). Integrating pests  and  pathogens  into  the  climate  change/food  security  debate. J.  Exp. Bot. 60,  2827-2838.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erp080
- Grivet,  L.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2002).  Sugarcane  genomics:  depicting  the  complex genome  of  an  important  tropical  crop. Curr.  Opin.  Plant  Biol. 5,  122-127. doi:  10.1016/S1369-5266(02)00234-0
- Guo,  H.,  Jiao,  Y.,  Tan,  X.,  Wang,  X.,  Huang,  X.,  Jin,  H.,  et  al.  (2019).  Gene duplication  and  genetic  innovation  in  cereal  genomes. Genome  Res. 29, 261-269.  doi:  10.1101/gr.237511.118
- Hanada,  K.,  Zou,  C.,  Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  Shinozaki,  K.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2008). Importance  of  lineage-specific  expansion  of  plant  tandem  duplicates  in  the adaptive  response  to  environmental  stimuli. Plant  Physiol. 148,  993-1003. doi:  10.1104/pp.108.122457
- Hanks, S. K., and Hunter, T. (1995). The eukaryotic protein kinase superfamily: kinase (catalytic) domain structure and classification 1. FASEB J. 9,  576-596. doi:  10.1096/fasebj.9.8.7768349
- Hasanuzzaman, M. (2020). Agronomic crops: Stress responses and tolerance .  New York,  NY:  Springer.
- Hoang,  N.  V.,  Furtado,  A.,  O'Keeffe,  A.  J.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and  Henry,  R.  J. (2017). Association of gene expression with biomass content and composition in  sugarcane. PLoS  One 12:e0183417.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0183417
- Hong, S., Chen, X., Jin, L., and Xiong, M. (2013). Canonical correlation analysis for RNA-seq co-expression networks. Nucleic Acids Res. 41:e95. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkt145
- Horton,  P .,  Park,  K.  J.,  Obayashi,  T.,  Fujita,  N.,  Harada,  H.,  Adams-Collier,  C., et  al.  (2007).  WoLF  PSORT:  protein  localization  predictor. Nucleic  Acids Res. 35,  W585-W587.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm259
- Hu,  W.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Shen,  Q.,  Zhang,  X.,  et  al.  (2018).  New insights  into  the  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  the  SWEET  family in Saccharum based  on  comparative  genomics. BMC Plant Biol. 18:270.  doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1495-y
- Huang,  T.  L.,  Huang,  L.  Y.,  Fu,  S.  F.,  Trinh,  N.  N.,  and  Huang,  H.  J.  (2014). Genomic profiling  of  rice  roots  with  short-and  long-term  chromium  stress. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 86,  157-170.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-014-0219-4
- Huang,  X.,  Song,  X.,  Chen,  R.,  Zhang,  B.,  Li,  C.,  Liang,  Y.,  et  al.  (2020). Genome-wide  analysis  of  the  DREB  subfamily  in Saccharum  spontaneum reveals  their  functional  divergence  during  cold  and  drought  stresses. Front. Genet. 10:1326.  doi:  10.3389/fgene.2019.01326
- Hunter,  T.  (1995).  Protein  kinases  and  phosphatases:  the  Yin  and  Yang  of protein phosphorylation  and  signaling. Cell 80, 225-236.  doi: 10.1016/ 0092-8674(95)90405-0
- ISO (2020). International sugar organization. Available at: https://www.isosugar. org/sugarsector/sugar  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Jain,  M.,  Li,  Q.  B.,  and  Chourey,  P .  S.  (2008).  Cloning  and  expression  analyses of sucrose non-fermenting-1-related kinase 1 (SnRK1b) gene during development  of  sorghum  and  maize  endosperm  and  its  implicated  role  in sugar-to-starch metabolic transition. Physiol. Plant. 134, 161-173. doi: 10.1111/j. 1399-3054.2008.01106.x
- Karpov, P. A., Sheremet, Y. A., Blume, Y. B., and Yemets, A. I. (2019). Studying the  role  of  protein  kinases  CK1  in  organization  of  cortical  microtubules  in Arabidopsis  thaliana root  cells. Cytol.  Genet. 53,  441-450.  doi:  10.3103/ S0095452719060033
- Kasirajan,  L.,  Valiyaparambth,  R.,  Velu,  J.,  Hari,  H.,  Srinivasavedantham,  V ., and Athaiappan, S. (2020). Gene expression studies of Saccharum spontaneum , a  wild  relative  of  sugarcane  in  response  to  salinity  stress. Biotechnol.  Appl. Biochem. doi:  10.1002/bab.1923  [Epub  ahead  of  print]
- Kebrom,  T.  H.,  McKinley,  B.,  and  Mullet,  J.  E.  (2017).  Dynamics  of  gene expression during development and expansion of vegetative stem internodes of bioenergy sorghum. Biotechnol. Biofuels 10, 1-16. doi: 10.1186/ s13068-017-0848-3
- Kim,  C.,  Wang,  X.,  Lee,  T.  H.,  Jakob,  K.,  Lee,  G.  J.,  and  Paterson,  A.  H. (2014).  Comparative analysis  of Miscanthus and Saccharum reveals  a  shared whole-genome  duplication  but  different  evolutionary  fates. Plant  Cell 26, 2420-2429.  doi:  10.1105/tpc.114.125583
- Kimura, M., and Ishikawa, T. (2018). Suppression of DYRK ortholog expression affects wax ester fermentation in Euglena gracilis . J. Appl. Phycol. 30, 367-373. doi:  10.1007/s10811-017-1235-y
- Kleinberg,  J.  M.  (1999).  Authoritative  sources  in  a  hyperlinked  environment. J.  ACM 46,  604-632.  doi:  10.1145/324133.324140
- Kolde,  R.,  and  Kolde,  M.  R.  (2015).  Package  'pheatmap' .  R  Package  1,  790. Krogh, A., Larsson, B., Von Heijne, G., and Sonnhammer, E. L. (2001). Predicting transmembrane  protein  topology  with  a  hidden  Markov  model:  application to complete genomes. J.  Mol. Biol. 305, 567-580. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315 Krzywinski,  M.,  Schein,  J.,  Birol,  I.,  Connors,  J.,  Gascoyne,  R.,  Horsman,  D., et  al.  (2009).  Circos:  an  information  aesthetic  for  comparative  genomics. Genome  Res. 19,  1639-1645.  doi:  10.1101/gr.092759.109
- Lalman,  J.  A.,  Shewa,  W .  A.,  Gallagher,  J.,  and  Ravella,  S.  (2016).  'Biofuels production  from  renewable  feedstocks'  in Quality  living  through  chemurgy and  green  chemistry .  ed.  P .  C.  K.  Lau  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  193-220. Lee,  T.,  Kim,  H.,  and  Lee,  I.  (2015).  Network-assisted  crop  systems  genetics: network inference and integrative analysis. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 24,  61-70. doi:  10.1016/j.pbi.2015.02.001
- Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2012).  Diversity,  classification  and  function of  the  plant  protein  kinase  superfamily. Philos.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  B:  Biol.  Sci. 367,  2619-2639.  doi:  10.1098/rstb.2012.0003
- Leinonen, R., Sugawara, H., Shumway, M., and International Nucleotide Sequence Database  Collaboration  (2010).  The  sequence  read  archive. Nucleic  Acids Res. 39,  D19-D21.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkq1019
- Li, Z., Hua, X., Zhong, W ., Yuan, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., et al. (2020). Genomewide  identification  and  expression  profile  analysis  of  WRKY  family  genes in the autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum . Plant Cell Physiol. 61,  616-630. doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcz227
- Li,  M.,  Liang,  Z.,  Zeng,  Y .,  Jing,  Y .,  Wu,  K.,  Liang,  J.,  et  al.  (2016b).  De  novo analysis  of  transcriptome  reveals  genes  associated  with  leaf  abscission  in sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). BMC Genomics 17:195.  doi:  10.1186/ s12864-016-2552-2

- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  Liang,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Liu,  X.,  et  al.  (2016a). Differential  expression  profiles  and  pathways  of  genes  in  sugarcane  leaf  at elongation stage in response to drought stress. Sci. Rep. 6:25698. doi: 10.1038/ srep25698
- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Wang,  Z.,  Liang,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  et  al.  (2017). Molecular  characterization  and  co-expression  analysis  of  the  SnRK2  gene family  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-12.  doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16152-4
- Li,  J.,  Tang,  W .,  Zhang,  Y .  W .,  Chen,  K.  N.,  Wang,  C.,  Liu,  Y .,  et  al.  (2018). Genome-wide  association  studies  for  five  forage  quality-related  traits  in sorghum ( Sorghum bicolor L.). Front. Plant Sci. 9:1146. doi: 10.3389/ fpls.2018.01146
- Li,  L.  B.,  Zhang,  Y .  R.,  Liu,  K.  C.,  Ni,  Z.  F .,  Fang,  Z.  J.,  Sun,  Q.  X.,  et  al. (2010).  Identification  and  bioinformatics  analysis  of  SnRK2  and  CIPK  family genes in sorghum. Agric. Sci. China 9, 19-30. doi: 10.1016/S1671-2927(09)60063-8
- Ling,  H.,  Huang,  N.,  Wu,  Q.,  Su,  Y.,  Peng,  Q.,  Ahmed,  W .,  et  al.  (2018). Transcriptional insights into the sugarcane-sorghum mosaic virus interaction. Trop.  Plant  Biol. 11,  163-176.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-018-9210-6
- Liu,  J.,  Chen,  N.,  Grant,  J.  N.,  Cheng,  Z.  M.,    Stewart,  C.  N.  Jr.,  and  Hewezi,  T. (2015). Soybean kinome: functional classification and gene expression patterns. J.  Exp.  Bot. 66,  1919-1934.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/eru537
- Mace,  E.  S.,  and  Jordan,  D.  R.  (2011).  Integrating  sorghum  whole  genome sequence  information  with  a  compendium  of  sorghum  QTL  studies  reveals uneven  distribution of QTL  and  of gene-rich regions with significant implications for crop improvement. Theor. Appl. Genet. 123:169. doi: 10.1007/ s00122-011-1575-y
- Magadum,  S.,  Banerjee,  U.,  Murugan,  P .,  Gangapur,  D.,  and  Ravikesavan,  R. (2013). Gene duplication as a major force in evolution. J. Genet. 92, 155-161. doi:  10.1007/s12041-013-0212-8
- Makita,  Y.,  Shimada,  S.,  Kawashima,  M.,  Kondou-Kuriyama,  T.,  Toyoda,  T., and  Matsui,  M.  (2015).  MOROKOSHI:  transcriptome  database  in Sorghum bicolor . Plant  Cell  Physiol. 56:e6.  doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcu187
- Mall,  R.,  Ullah,  E.,  Kunji,  K.,  D' Angelo,  F.,  Bensmail,  H.,  and  Ceccarelli,  M. (2017).  'Differential  community  detection  in  paired  biological  networks, ' in Proceedings  of  the  8th  ACM  International  Conference  on  Bioin-formatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics; August 20-23, 2017; Massachusetts,  MA:  ACM,  330-339.
- Mancini, M. C., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Sforça, D. A., and de Souza, A. P . (2018). 'Targeted sequencing by gene synteny,' a new strategy for polyploid species: sequencing  and  physical  structure  of  a  complex  sugarcane  region. Front. Plant  Sci. 9:397.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2018.00397
- Manning, G., Plowman, G. D., Hunter, T., and Sudarsanam, S. (2002). Evolution of  protein  kinase  signaling  from  yeast  to  man. Trends  Biochem.  Sci. 27, 514-520.  doi:  10.1016/S0968-0004(02)02179-5
- Marquardt,  A.,  Scalia,  G.,  Wathen-Dunn,  K.,  and  Botha,  F.  C.  (2017).  Yellow canopy  syndrome  (YCS)  in  sugarcane  is  associated  with  altered  carbon partitioning in the leaf. Sugar Tech 19, 647-655. doi: 10.1007/s12355-017-0555-1
- Meng,  X.,  and  Zhang,  S.  (2013).  MAPK  cascades  in  plant  disease  resistance signaling. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 51, 245-266. doi: 10.1146/annurevphyto-082712-102314
- Miller, M., Pfeiffer, W ., and Schwartz, T. (2010). 'Creating the cipres science gateway for inference of large phylogenetic trees' in 2010 Gateway Computing Environments Workshop  (GCE) ;  November  14,  2010;  New  Orleans,  LA:  IEEE,  1-8.
- Min, X. J. (2013). ASFinder: a tool for genome-wide identification of alternatively splicing transcripts from EST-derived sequences. Int. J. Bioinforma. Res. Appl. 9,  221-226.  doi:  10.1504/IJBRA.2013.053603
- Min,  X.  J.,  Powell,  B.,  Braessler,  J.,  Meinken,  J.,  Yu,  F.,  and  Sablok,  G.  (2015). Genome-wide cataloging and analysis of alternatively spliced genes in cereal crops. BMC  Genomics 16:721.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-015-1914-5
- Mitra,  K.,  Carvunis,  A.  R.,  Ramesh,  S.  K.,  and  Ideker,  T.  (2013).  Integrative approaches  for  finding  modular  structure  in  biological  networks. Nat.  Rev. Genet. 14,  719-732.  doi:  10.1038/nrg3552
- Moniz, L., Dutt, P .,  Haider,  N.,  and  Stambolic,  V .  (2011).  Nek  family  of  kinases in cell cycle, checkpoint control and cancer. Cell Div. 6:18. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-6-18
- Monreal, J. A., Arias-Baldrich, C., Pérez-Montaño, F., Gandullo, J., Echevarría, C., and García-Mauriño, S. (2013). Factors involved in the rise of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase-kinase activity caused by salinity in sorghum leaves. Planta 237,  1401-1413.  doi:  10.1007/s00425-013-1855-7
- Mutti,  J.  S.,  Bhullar,  R.  K.,  and  Gill,  K.  S.  (2017).  Evolution  of  gene  expression balance  among  homeologs  of  natural  polyploids. G3 7,  1225-1237.  doi: 10.1534/g3.116.038711
- Nagaraju, M., Reddy, P. S., Kumar, S. A., Kumar, A., Rajasheker, G., Rao, D. M., et  al.  (2020).  Genome-wide  identification  and  transcriptional  profiling  of small  heat  shock  protein  gene  family  under  diverse  abiotic  stress  conditions in Sorghum bicolor (L.). Int.  J.  Biol.  Macromol. 142,  822-834.  doi:  10.1016/j. ijbiomac.2019.10.023
- Nhiri,  M.,  Bakrim,  N.,  Pacquit,  V .,  Hachimi-Messouak,  Z.  E.,  Osuna,  L.,  and Vidal, J. (1998). Calcium-dependent and -independent phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinases in sorghum leaves: further evidence for the involvement of the calcium-independent protein kinase in the in situ regulatory phosphorylation  of  c4  phosphoenolpyruvate  carboxylase. Plant  Cell  Physiol. 39,  241-246.  doi:  10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029363
- Niedner,  R.  H.,  Buzko,  O.  V .,  Haste,  N.  M.,  Taylor,  A.,  Gribskov,  M.,  and Taylor,  S.  S.  (2006).  Protein  kinase  resource:  an  integrated  environment  for phosphorylation  research. Proteins 63,  78-86.  doi:  10.1002/prot.20825
- Okura,  V.  K.,  de  Souza,  R.  S.,  de  Siqueira  Tada,  S.  F.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2016). BAC-pool  sequencing  and  assembly  of  19  Mb  of  the  complex  sugarcane genome. Front.  Plant  Sci. 7:342.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00342
- Pagariya,  M.  C.,  Devarumath,  R.  M.,  and  Kawar,  P .  G.  (2012).  Biochemical characterization and identification of differentially expressed candidate genes in salt stressed sugarcane. Plant Sci. 184, 1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.12.002
- Panje, R. R., and  Babu,  C.  N. (1960). Studies in Saccharum  spontaneum distribution and geographical association of chromosome numbers. Cytologia 25,  152-172.  doi:  10.1508/cytologia.25.152
- Papini-Terzi,  F. S., Rocha,  F.  R., Nicoliello Vêncio,  R.  Z., Oliveira, K. C., de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Vicentini,  R.,  et  al.  (2005).  Transcription  profiling  of signal  transduction-related  genes  in  sugarcane  tissues. DNA Res. 12,  27-38. doi:  10.1093/dnares/12.1.27
- Parra-Londono, S., Fiedler, K., Kavka, M., Samans, B., Wieckhorst, S., Zacharias, A., et  al.  (2018).  Genetic  dissection  of  early-season  cold  tolerance  in  sorghum: genome-wide association studies for seedling emergence and survival under field and controlled environment conditions. Theor. Appl. Genet. 131, 581-595. doi:  10.1007/s00122-017-3021-2
- Patade,  V .  Y.,  Rai,  A.  N.,  and  Suprasanna,  P .  (2011).  Expression  analysis  of sugarcane shaggy-like kinase (SuSK) gene identified through cDNA subtractive hybridization  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Protoplasma 248, 613-621.  doi:  10.1007/s00709-010-0207-8
- Paterson,  A.  H.,  Bowers,  J.  E.,  Bruggmann,  R.,  Dubchak,  I.,  Grimwood,  J., Gundlach, H., et al. (2009). The Sorghum bicolor genome and the diversification of  grasses. Nature 457,  551-556.  doi:  10.1038/nature07723
- Patro,  R.,  Duggal,  G.,  and  Kingsford,  C.  (2015).  Salmon:  accurate,  versatile and ultrafast quantification from RNA-seq data using lightweight-alignment. Biorxiv  [preprint].  doi:  10.1101/021592
- Paungfoo-Lonhienne, C., Lonhienne, T. G., Yeoh, Y. K., Donose, B. C., Webb, R. I., Parsons,  J.,  et  al.  (2016).  Crosstalk  between  sugarcane  and  a  plant-growth promoting Burkholderia species. Sci.  Rep. 6:37389.  doi:  10.1038/srep37389
- Pei,  G.  L.,  Jun,  G.,  Wang,  Q.  H.,  and  Kang,  Z.  S.  (2019).  Comparative  analysis of protein kinases and associated domains between Ascomycota and Basidiomycota . J. Integr. Agric. 18, 96-107. doi: 10.1016/S2095-3119(18)62022-2
- Pestenácz, A., and Erdei, L. (1996). Calcium-dependent protein kinase in maize and  sorghum  induced  by  polyethylene  glycol. Physiol.  Plant. 97,  360-364. doi:  10.1034/j.1399-3054.1996.970221.x
- Petersen, T. N., Brunak, S., Von Heijne, G., and Nielsen, H. (2011). SignalP 4.0: discriminating  signal  peptides  from  transmembrane  regions. Nat.  Methods 8,  785-786.  doi:  10.1038/nmeth.1701
- Premachandran,  M.  N.,  Prathima,  P .  T.,  and  Lekshmi,  M.  (2011).  Sugarcane and  polyploidy:  a  review. J.  Sugarcane  Res. 1,  1-15.
- Price,  M.  N.,  Dehal,  P .  S.,  and  Arkin,  A.  P .  (2010).  FastTree  2-approximately maximum-likelihood  trees  for  large  alignments. PLoS  One 5:e9490.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009490
- Raghavan, U. N., Albert, R., and Kumara, S. (2007). Near linear time algorithm to detect community structures in large-scale networks. Phys. Rev. E 76:036106. doi:  10.1103/PhysRevE.76.036106
- R  Core  Team  (2013). R:  A  language  and  environment  for  statistical  computing . Vienna,  Austria:  R  Foundation  for  Statistical  Computing.
- Santa Brigida, A. B., Rojas, C. A., Grativol, C., de Armas, E. M., Entenza, J. O., Thiebaut,  F.,  et  al.  (2016).  Sugarcane  transcriptome  analysis  in  response  to

- infection caused by Acidovorax avenae subsp. avenae. PLoS One 11:e0166473. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0166473
- Schmutz,  J.,  Cannon,  S.  B.,  Schlueter,  J.,  Ma,  J.,  Mitros,  T.,  Nelson,  W .,  et  al. (2010).  Genome  sequence  of  the  palaeopolyploid  soybean. Nature 463, 178-183.  doi:  10.1038/nature08670
- Serin,  E.  A.  R.,  Nijveen,  H.,  Hilhorst,  H.  W .  M.,  and  Ligterink,  W .  (2016). Learning  from  co-expression  networks:  possibilities  and  challenges. Front. Plant  Sci. 7:444.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00444
- Serna-Saldívar, S. O., Chuck-Hernández, C., Pérez-Carrillo, E., and Heredia-Olea, E. (2012).  'Sorghum  as  a  multifunctional  crop  for  the  production  of  fuel ethanol:  current  status  and  future  trends'  in Bioethanol .  ed.  M.  A.  P .  Lima (Rijeka,  Croatia:  IntechOpen),  51-74.
- Sforça, D. A., Vautrin, S., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Mancini, M. C., Romero-da Cruz, M. V., and Pereira, G. d. S., et al.  (2019). Gene duplication in  the  sugarcane  genome:  a  case  study  of  allele  interactions  and  evolutionary patterns in two genic regions. Front. Plant Sci. 10:553. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00553
- Shi,  Y .,  Xu,  H.,  Shen,  Q.,  Lin,  J.,  W ang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  et  al.  (2019).  Comparative analysis  of  SUS  gene  family  between Saccharum  officinarum and Saccharum spontaneum . Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  174-185.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09230-6
- Singh,  D.  K.,  Calviño,  M.,  Brauer,  E.  K.,  Fernandez-Pozo,  N.,  Strickler,  S., Yalamanchili,  R.,  et  al.  (2014).  The  tomato  kinome  and  the  tomato  kinase library ORFeome:  novel  resources  for  the  study  of  kinases and  signal transduction  in  tomato  and  solanaceae  species. Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 27,  7-17.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-08-13-0218-TA
- Sperschneider, J., Catanzariti, A.-M., DeBoer, K., Petre, B., Gardiner, D. M., Singh, K. B., et  al.  (2017).  LOCALIZER:  subcellular  localization  prediction  of  both  plant  and effector  proteins  in  the  plant  cell. Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-14.  doi:  10.1038/srep44598
- Srivastava,  S.,  and  Kumar,  P .  (2020).  ' Abiotic  stress  responses  and  tolerance mechanisms  for  sustaining  crop  productivity  in  sugarcane'  in Agronomic crops .  eds.  S.  Naz,  Z.  Fatima,  P .  Iqbal,  A.  Khan,  I.  Zakir,  S.  Noreen  et  al. (Singapore:  Springer),  29-47.
- Su, W., Huang, L., Ling, H., Mao, H., Huang, N., Su, Y., et al. (2020b). Sugarcane calcineurin B-like (CBL) genes play important but versatile roles in regulation of  responses  to  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses. Sci.  Rep. 10,  1-13.  doi:  10.1038/ s41598-019-57058-7
- Su,  W.,  Ren,  Y.,  Wang,  D.,  Su,  Y.,  Feng,  J.,  Zhang,  C.,  et  al.  (2020a).  The alcohol  dehydrogenase  gene  family  in  sugarcane  and  its  involvement  in cold stress regulation. BMC Genomics 21:521. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-06929-9
- Supek, F., Bo š njak,  M., Š kunca, N., and Š muc, T. (2011). REVIGO summarizes and  visualizes  long  lists  of  gene  ontology  terms. PLoS  One 6:e21800.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021800
- Tai,  Y.,  Liu,  C.,  Yu,  S.,  Y ang,  H.,  Sun,  J.,  Guo,  C.,  et  al.  (2018).  Gene  coexpression network analysis reveals coordinated regulation of three characteristic secondary  biosynthetic pathways  in tea plant ( Camellia sinensis ). BMC Genomics 19:616.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-018-4999-9
- Takatani,  S.,  Otani,  K.,  Kanazawa,  M.,  Takahashi,  T.,  and  Motose,  H.  (2015). Structure, function, and evolution of plant NIMA-related kinases: implication for  phosphorylation-dependent  microtubule  regulation. J.  Plant  Res. 128, 875-891.  doi:  10.1007/s10265-015-0751-6
- Tan,  S.  T.,  and  Xue,  H.  W .  (2014).  Casein  kinase  1  regulates  ethylene  synthesis by  phosphorylating  and  promoting  the  turnover  of  ACS5. Cell  Rep. 9, 1692-1702.  doi:  10.1016/j.celrep.2014.10.047
- Teich,  R.,  Grauvogel,  C.,  and  Petersen,  J.  (2007).  Intron  distribution  in  Plantae: 500  million  years  of  stasis  during  land  plant  evolution. Gene 394,  96-104. doi:  10.1016/j.gene.2007.02.011
- Teixeira,  E.  I.,  Fischer,  G.,  van  Velthuizen,  H.,  Walter,  C.,  and  Ewert,  F.  (2013). Global  hot-spots  of  heat  stress  on  agricultural  crops  due  to  climate  change. Agric.  For.  Meteorol. 170,  206-215.  doi:  10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.09.002
- Thirugnanasambandam,  P.  P.,  Hoang,  N.  V .,  Furtado,  A.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and Henry,  R.  J.  (2017).  Association  of  variation  in  the  sugarcane  transcriptome with  sugar  content. BMC Genomics 18:909.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-017-4302-5
- Tuleski,  T.  R.,  Kimball,  J.,  Do  Amaral,  F.  P .,  Pereira,  T.  P .,  Tadra-Sfeir,  M.  Z., de  Oliveira  Pedrosa,  F.,  et  al.  (2020). Herbaspirillum  rubrisubalbicans as  a phytopathogenic  model  to  study  the  immune  system  of Sorghum  bicolor . Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 33,  235-246.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-06-19-0154-R
- UniProt  Consortium  (2007).  The  universal  protein  resource  (UniProt). Nucleic Acids  Res. 36,  D190-D195.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm895
- Usha Kiranmayee, K. N. S., Hash, C. T., Kavi Kishor, P . B., Ramu, P ., Sivasubramani, S., Sakhale,  S.  A.,  et  al.  (2017).  'Fine  mapping  of  stay-green  QTLs  on  sorghum
- chromosome SBI-10L-an approach from genome to phenome' in InterDrought-V ; February  21-25,  2017;  Hyderabad,  India:  ICRISAT,  235.
- Vaid,  N.,  Pandey,  P .  K.,  and  Tuteja,  N.  (2016).  'Lectin  receptor-like  kinases and their  emerging  role  in  abiotic  stress  tolerance'  in Abiotic  stress  response in  plants .  eds.  N.  Tuteja  and  S.  Gill  (Weinheim,  Germany:  Wiley-VCH Verlag  GmbH  &amp;  Co.),  456.
- van  Dam,  S.,  Vosa,  U.,  van  der  Graaf,  A.,  Franke,  L.,  and  de  Magalhaes,  J.  P . (2018).  Gene  co-expression  analysis  for  functional  classification  and  genedisease  predictions. Brief.  Bioinform. 19,  575-592.  doi:  10.1093/bib/bbw139
- Varberg,  J.  M.,  Coppens,  I.,  Arrizabalaga,  G.,  and  Gaji,  R.  Y.  (2018).  TgTKL1 is  a  unique  plant-like  nuclear  kinase  that  plays  an  essential  role  in  acute toxoplasmosis. MBio 9,  e00301-e00318.  doi:  10.1128/mBio.00301-18
- Varoquaux,  N.,  Cole,  B.,  Gao,  C.,  Pierroz,  G.,  Baker,  C.  R.,  Patel,  D.,  et  al. (2019).  Transcriptomic  analysis  of  field-droughted  sorghum  from  seedling to  maturity  reveals  biotic  and  metabolic  responses. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U.  S.  A. 116,  27124-27132.  doi:  10.1073/pnas.1907500116
- Vettore,  A.  L.,  da  Silva,  F.  R.,  Kemper,  E.  L.,  Souza,  G.  M.,  da  Silva,  A.  M., Ferro,  M.  I.  T.,  et  al.  (2003).  Analysis  and  functional  annotation  of  an expressed  sequence  tag  collection  for  tropical  crop  sugarcane. Genome  Res. 13,  2725-2735.  doi:  10.1101/gr.1532103
- Vicentini,  R.,  de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Dornelas,  M.  C.,  and  Menossi,  M.  (2009). Characterization  of  a  sugarcane  ( Saccharum spp.)  gene  homolog  to  the brassinosteroid  insensitive1-associated  receptor  kinase  1  that  is  associated to sugar content. Plant Cell Rep. 28, 481-491. doi: 10.1007/s00299-008-0656-0
- Vikal,  Y.,  Kaur,  A.,  Jindal,  J.,  Kaur,  K.,  Pathak,  D.,  Garg,  T.,  et  al.  (2020). Identification  of  genomic  regions  associated  with  shoot  fly  resistance  in maize  and  their  syntenic  relationships  in  the Sorghum genome. PLoS  One 15:e0234335.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0234335
- Villanueva,  R.  A.  M.,  and  Chen,  Z.  J.  (2019).  ggplot2:  elegant  graphics  for data analysis (2nd ed.). Meas. Interdiscip. Res. Pers. 17, 160-167. doi: 10.1080/15366367.2019.1565254
- Voorrips,  R.  E.  (2002).  MapChart:  software  for  the  graphical  presentation  of linkage  maps  and  QTLs. J.  Hered. 93,  77-78.  doi:  10.1093/jhered/93.1.77
- Wang,  H.,  Gu,  L.,  Zhang,  X.,  Liu,  M.,  Jiang,  H.,  Cai,  R.,  et  al.  (2018).  Global transcriptome  and  weighted  gene  co-expression  network  analyses  reveal hybrid-specific modules and candidate genes related to plant height development in  maize. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 98,  187-203.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-018-0763-4
- Wang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  Xu,  J.,  Chen,  Z.,  Fan,  T .,  Zeng,  Z.,  et  al.  (2019c).  Comparative genomics  revealed  the  gene  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  magnesium transporter families in Saccharum . BMC Genomics 20:83. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5437-3
- Wang,  J.,  Li,  Y.,  Zhu,  F.,  Ming,  R.,  and  Chen,  L.  Q.  (2019b).  Genome-wide analysis of nitrate  transporter  (nrt/npf)  family  in  sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Trop. Plant Biol. 12, 133-149. doi: 10.1007/s12042-019-09220-8
- Wang,  J.,  Roe,  B.,  Macmil,  S.,  Yu,  Q.,  Murray,  J.  E.,  Tang,  H.,  et  al.  (2010). Microcollinearity  between  autopolyploid  sugarcane  and  diploid  sorghum genomes. BMC  Genomics 11:261.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2164-11-261
- Wang,  Y.,  Tang,  H.,  DeBarry,  J.  D.,  Tan,  X.,  Li,  J.,  Wang,  X.,  et  al.  (2012). MCScanX: a toolkit for detection  and  evolutionary  analysis  of  gene  synteny and  collinearity. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40:e49.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr1293
- Wang,  H.,  Wang,  Y.,  Xiao,  N.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  M.,  Ming,  R.,  et  al.  (2019a). NAC transcription factors in autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum :  genomewide  identification,  expression  pattern  and  a  'Dry' orthologous  gene. Res.  Sq. 1-37  [Preprint].  doi:  10.21203/rs.2.17032/v1
- Wang,  T.  J.,  Wang,  X.  H.,  and  Yang,  Q.  H.  (2020).  Comparative  analysis  of drought-responsive transcriptome in different genotype Saccharum spontaneum L. Sugar  Tech 22,  411-427.  doi:  10.1007/s12355-019-00774-1
- Wei,  K.,  Wang,  Y.,  and  Xie,  D.  (2014).  Identification  and  expression  profile analysis  of  the  protein  kinase  gene  superfamily  in  maize  development. Mol. Breed. 33,  155-172.  doi:  10.1007/s11032-013-9941-x
- Xiong,  J.,  Cui,  X.,  Y uan,  X.,  Y u,  X.,  Sun,  J.,  and  Gong,  Q.  (2016).  The  hippo/STE20 homolog SIK1 interacts with MOB1 to regulate cell proliferation and cell expansion in Arabidopsis . J.  Exp.  Bot. 67,  1461-1475.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erv538
- Xu,  G.,  Guo,  C.,  Shan,  H.,  and  Kong,  H.  (2012).  Divergence  of  duplicate  genes in  exon-intron  structure. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A. 109,  1187-1192. doi:  10.1073/pnas.1109047109
- Xu,  S., Wang,  J., Shang,  H.,  Huang,  Y.,  Yao,  W .,  Chen,  B.,  et al.  (2018). Transcriptomic characterization and potential marker development of contrasting sugarcane cultivars. Sci. Rep. 8, 1-11. doi: 10.1038/ s41598-018-19832-x

- Yan,  J.,  Li,  G.,  Guo,  X.,  Li,  Y .,  and  Cao,  X.  (2018).  Genome-wide  classification, evolutionary analysis and gene expression patterns of the kinome in Gossypium . PLoS  One 13:e0197392.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0197392
- Yan, J., Su, P ., Wei, Z., Nevo, E., and Kong, L. (2017). Genome-wide identification, classification,  evolutionary  analysis  and  gene  expression  patterns  of  the protein  kinase  gene  family  in  wheat  and Aegilops  tauschii . Plant  Mol.  Biol. 95,  227-242.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-017-0637-1
- Yu,  C.  S.,  Chen,  Y.  C.,  Lu,  C.  H.,  and  Hwang,  J.  K.  (2006).  Prediction  of protein subcellular localization. Proteins 64, 643-651. doi: 10.1002/prot.21018
- Yu,  G.,  Smith,  D.  K.,  Zhu,  H.,  Guan,  Y.,  and  Lam,  T.  T.  Y.  (2017).  ggtree:  an R  package  for  visualization  and  annotation  of  phylogenetic  trees  with  their covariates  and  other  associated  data. Methods  Ecol.  Evol. 8,  28-36.  doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.12628
- Zhang,  Z.,  Li,  J.,  Zhao,  X.  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Wong,  G.  K.  S.,  and  Yu,  J.  (2006). KaKs\_calculator: calculating Ka and Ks through model selection and model averaging. Genom. Proteom. Bioinform. 4, 259-263. doi: 10.1016/ S1672-0229(07)60007-2
- Zhang,  W.,  Lin,  J.,  Dong,  F.,  Ma,  Q.,  Wu,  S.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2019b).  Genomic and  allelic  analyses  of  laccase  genes  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  spontaneum L.). Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  219-229.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09239-x
- Zhang,  C.,  Wang,  J.,  Tao,  H.,  Dang,  X.,  Wang,  Y.,  Chen,  M.,  et  al.  (2015). FvBck1, a component of cell wall integrity MAP kinase pathway, is required for  virulence  and  oxidative  stress  response  in  sugarcane  Pokkah  Boeng pathogen. Front.  Microbiol. 6:1096.  doi:  10.3389/fmicb.2015.01096
- Zhang,  H.,  and  Yin,  T.  (2020).  Analysis  of  topology  properties  in  different tissues of poplar based on gene co-expression networks. Tree Genet. Genomes 16:6.  doi:  10.1007/s11295-019-1400-3
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Li,  L.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Chen,  Y.,  et  al.  (2019a). Recent  polyploidization  events  in  three Saccharum founding  species. Plant Biotechnol.  J. 17,  264-274.  doi:  10.1111/pbi.12962
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  X.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Hua,  X.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2018). Allele-defined genome of the autopolyploid sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Nat.  Genet. 50,  1565-1573.  doi:  10.1038/s41588-018-0237-2
- Zhao,  W.,  Langfelder,  P .,  Fuller,  T.,  Dong,  J.,  Li,  A.,  and  Hovarth,  S.  (2010). Weighted  gene  coexpression  network  analysis:  state  of  the  art. J.  Biopharm. Stat. 20,  281-300.  doi:  10.1080/10543400903572753
- Zhu,  K.,  Liu,  H.,  Chen,  X.,  Cheng,  Q.,  and  Cheng,  Z.  M.  M.  (2018a).  The kinome  of  pineapple:  catalog  and  insights  into  functions  in  crassulacean acid metabolism plants. BMC Plant Biol. 18:199. doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1389-z
- Zhu,  K.,  Wang,  X.,  Liu,  J.,  Tang,  J.,  Cheng,  Q.,  Chen,  J.  G.,  et  al.  (2018b). The  grapevine  kinome:  annotation,  classification  and  expression  patterns  in developmental  processes  and  stress  responses. Hortic.  Res. 5,  1-16.  doi: 10.1038/s41438-018-0027-0
- Zou,  X.,  Liu,  A.,  Zhang,  Z.,  Ge,  Q.,  Fan,  S.,  Gong,  W .,  et  al.  (2019).  Coexpression  network  analysis  and  hub  gene  selection  for  high-quality  fiber in  upland  cotton  ( Gossypium  hirsutum )  using  RNA  sequencing  analysis. Gene 10:119.  doi:  10.3390/genes10020119
- Zulawski, M., and Schulze, W. X. (2015). 'The plant kinome' in Plant Phosphoproteomics .  ed.  W .  Schulze  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  1-23.
- Zulawski,  M.,  Schulze,  G.,  Braginets,  R.,  Hartmann,  S.,  and  Schulze,  W .  X. (2014).  The Arabidopsis kinome:  phylogeny  and  evolutionary  insights  into functional diversification. BMC Genomics 15:548. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-548

Conflict  of  Interest: The  authors  declare  that  the  research  was  conducted  in the  absence  of  any  commercial  or  financial  relationships  that  could  be  construed as  a  potential  conflict  of  interest.

Copyright  ©  2021 Aono,  Pimenta,  Garcia,  Correr,  Hosaka,  Carrasco,  Cardoso-Silva, Mancini,  Sforça,  dos  Santos,  Nagai,  Pinto,  Landell,  Carneiro,  Balsalobre,  Quiles, Pereira,  Rodrigues  Alves  Margarido  and  de  Souza.  This  is  an  open-access  article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  in  other  forums  is  permitted,  provided  the original  author(s)  and  the  copyright  owner(s)  are  credited  and  that  the  original publication  in  this  journal  is  cited,  in  accordance  with  accepted  academic  practice. No  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  is  permitted  which  does  not  comply  with these  terms.

## GLOSSARY

| Aco            | Aquilegia coerulea                                                                                                           |
|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AGC            | Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (cAPK), cGMP-dependent protein kinase, and lipid signaling kinase families               |
| Aly            | Arabidopsis lyrata                                                                                                           |
| Ath            | Arabidopsis thaliana                                                                                                         |
| B-lectin       | D-mannose-binding lectin                                                                                                     |
| Bdi            | Brachypodium distachyon                                                                                                      |
| CAMK           | Calcium- and calmodulin-regulated kinase                                                                                     |
| Ccl            | Citrus clementina                                                                                                            |
| CDS            | DNA coding sequence                                                                                                          |
| CK1            | Casein kinase 1                                                                                                              |
| CMGC           | Cyclin-dependent kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, glycogen synthase kinase, and cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinase |
| Cpa            | Carica papaya                                                                                                                |
| Cre            | Chlamydomonas reinhardtii                                                                                                    |
| Csa            | Cucumis sativus                                                                                                              |
| Csi            | Citrus sinensis                                                                                                              |
| DUF26          | Domain of Unknown Function 26                                                                                                |
| Egr            | Eucalyptus grandis                                                                                                           |
| ER             | Endoplasmic reticulum                                                                                                        |
| GM             | Gene model                                                                                                                   |
| Gma            | Glycine max                                                                                                                  |
| GO             | Gene Ontology                                                                                                                |
| GUB            | Galacturonan-binding                                                                                                         |
| HMM            | Hidden Markov model                                                                                                          |
| IRE1           | Inositol-requiring kinase 1                                                                                                  |
| Ka             | Nonsynonymous substitution rates                                                                                             |
| Ks             | Synonymous substitution rates                                                                                                |
| LRR            | Leucine-rich repeat                                                                                                          |
| LRRNT          | Leucine-rich repeat N-terminal domain                                                                                        |
| Mes            | Manihot esculenta                                                                                                            |
| Mgu            | Mimulus guttatus                                                                                                             |
| Mtr            | Medicago truncatula                                                                                                          |
| MW             | Molecular weight                                                                                                             |
| MYA            | Million years ago                                                                                                            |
| Osa            | Oryza sativa kinase                                                                                                          |
| PEK            | Pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha                                                                               |
| PK             | Protein kinase                                                                                                               |
| pI             | Isoelectric point                                                                                                            |
| Ppa            | Physcomitrella patens                                                                                                        |
| Ppe Ptr        | Prunus persica Populus trichocarpa                                                                                           |
| Rco            | Ricinus communis                                                                                                             |
| RLK            | Receptor-like kinase                                                                                                         |
| S-locus-glycop |                                                                                                                              |
|                | S-locus glycoprotein                                                                                                         |
| Sit            | Setaria italica                                                                                                              |
| Smo            | Selaginella moellendorffii                                                                                                   |
|                | Saccharum spontaneum                                                                                                         |
| Ssp            |                                                                                                                              |
| STE TKL        | Serine/threonine kinase Tyrosine kinase-like kinase                                                                          |
| TPM            | Transcripts per million                                                                                                      |
| Vca            | Volvox carteri                                                                                                               |
| Vvi            | Vitis vinifera                                                                                                               |
| WAK WGD        | Wall-associated receptor kinase Whole-genome duplication                                                                     |
| Zma            | Zea mays                                                                                                                     |
MATERIALS
## MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

## Sugarcane  Plant  Material  and  RNA-Seq

Sugarcane  hybrids  and S.  officinarum and  Ssp  clones  were  used for expression analyses in sugarcane. Four independent experiments were  performed  and  are  detailed  in Supplementary  Table  2 . Experiment  1  was  based  on  root  material  from  the  RB867515, RB92579, RB855113, RB855536, SP79-1011, and SP80-3280 hybrid cultivars.  This  trial  was  carried  out  in  a  greenhouse  with  three replicates per cultivar in a completely randomized design. Plants were grown in 18-L plastic pots with a mixture of 20% commercial planting  mix  and  80%  sand.  Ninety-five  days  after  planting, we sampled the root material of each plant, avoiding tiller roots.

Experiments  2  and  3  were  performed  with  leaf  and  culm (internode  1)  samples,  respectively,  from  plants  grown  in  the field  in  Araras,  Brazil  (22 ° 18 ' 41.0 '' and  23 ' 05.0 '' W,  at  an altitude  of  611  m).  Leaf  samples  were  collected  from  portions of the top visible dewlap leaves (+1) of 6-month-old sugarcane plants  in  April  2016.  We  collected  the  middle  section  of  each leaf,  removing  the  midrib.  For  culms,  samples  from  the  first internode  were  collected  at  four  time  points  in  2016:  April (synchronous  with  leaf  sampling),  June,  August,  and  October.

In Experiment 2, described by Correr et al. (2020), we used samples  from  the  SP80-3280,  RB72454,  and  RB855156  hybrid cultivars; TUC71-7 and US85-1008 hybrids; White Transparent and Criolla Rayada S. officinarum genotypes; IN84-58, IN84-88, Krakatau, and SES205A Ssp genotypes; and IJ76-318 Saccharum robustum genotypes.  For  six  genotypes  -  SP80-3280,  RB72454, US85-1008, White Transparent, IN84-58, and SES205A -we  collected  and  sequenced  three  biological  replicates,  while the  others  were  represented  by  one  biological  replicate;  all samples  were  represented  by  three  technical  replicates.  Leaf samples  were  sequenced  in  two  lanes.  In  Experiment  3,  culm samples  were  collected  from  the  SP80-3280  and  R570  hybrid cultivars, F36-819 hybrid, and IN84-58 S. spontaneum genotype. Culm  samples  were  sequenced  in  six  lanes.

Experiment  4  was  based  on  samples  from  the  SP80-3280 and IACSP93-3046 hybrid cultivars, Badila De Java S. officinarum genotype,  and  Krakatau  Ssp  genotype.  RNA  samples  were extracted  in  triplicate  from  the  top  (internode  3)  and  bottom (internode  8)  culms  and  collected  in  the  field  in  Ribeirão Preto,  Brazil  (21 ° 12 ' 28.7 '' S,  47 ° 52 ' 29.1 '' W)  in  June  2016.

After  collection,  samples  were  immediately  frozen  in  liquid nitrogen  and  stored  at -80 ° C  until  processed.  Total  RNA  was extracted  from  200  mg  of  ground  roots  and  50  mg  of  ground leaves or culms using an RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,  United  States).  We  quantified  the  RNA  and  verified  its integrity  in  a  2100  BioAnalyzer  using  a  Eukaryote  Total  RNA Nano Assay (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States). A total of 300 ng of RNA per sample was used to prepare cDNA libraries  with  a  TruSeq  Stranded  mRNA  LT  Kit  (Illumina,  San Diego, CA, United States). Libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 platform  (Illumina,  San  Diego,  CA,  United  States).

## SUPPLEMENTARY  MATERIAL

The  Supplementary  Figures  and  Tables  for  this  article  have been  deposited  in  Figshare  (https://figshare.com/):  https://doi. org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5122460.v2. The Supplementary Results section  can  be  found  online  at:  https://www.frontiersin.org/ articles/10.3389/fpls.2021.668623/full#supplementary-material

- Champion,  A.,  Kreis,  M.,  Mockaitis,  K.,  Picaud,  A.,  and  Henry,  Y.  (2004). Arabidopsis kinome:  after  the  casting. Funct.  Integr.  Genom. 4,  163-187.  doi: 10.1007/s10142-003-0096-4
- Clayton,  W .  D.  (1987).  ' Andropogoneae'  in Grass  systematics  and  evolution .  ed. T. R. Soderstrom (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institutional Press), 307-309. Conesa,  A.,  Götz,  S.,  García-Gómez,  J.  M.,  Terol,  J.,  Talón,  M.,  and  Robles,  M. (2005).  Blast2GO:  a  universal  tool  for  annotation,  visualization  and  analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21,  3674-3676. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/bti610
- Correr,  F.  H.,  Hosaka,  G.  K.,  Barreto,  F.  Z.,  Valadão,  I.  B.,  Balsalobre,  T.  W .  A., Furtado,  A.,  et  al.  (2020).  Differential  expression  in  leaves  of Saccharum genotypes  contrasting  in  biomass  production  provides  evidence  of  genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC  Genomics 21:673. doi: 10.1186/ s12864-020-07091-y
- Csardi,  G.,  and  Nepusz,  T.  (2006).  The  igraph  software  package  for  complex network  research. InterJ.  Complex  Syst. 1695,  1-9.
- Dai,  A.  (2013).  Increasing  drought  under  global  warming  in  observations  and models. Nat.  Clim.  Chang. 3,  52-58.  doi:  10.1038/nclimate1633
- Dardick,  C.,  Chen,  J.,  Richter,  T.,  Ouyang,  S.,  and  Ronald,  P .  (2007).  The  rice kinase database. A phylogenomic database for the rice kinome. Plant Physiol. 143,  579-586.  doi:  10.1104/pp.106.087270
- De  Souza  Barbosa,  G.  V .,  Dos  Santos,  J.  M.,  Diniz,  C.  A.,  Cursi,  D.  E.,  and Hoffmann,  H.  P.  (2020).  'Energy  cane  breeding'  in Sugarcane  biorefinery, technology  and  perspectives .  eds.  F.  Santos,  S.  Rabelo,  M.  De  Matos  and P.  Eichler  (London,  UK:  Elsevier),  103-116.
- Dezhsetan,  S.  (2017).  Genome  scanning  for  identification  and  mapping  of receptor-like  kinase  (RLK)  gene  superfamily  in Solanum tuberosum . Physiol. Mol.  Biol.  Plants 23,  755-765.  doi:  10.1007/s12298-017-0471-6
- Dharshini, S., Hoang, N. V ., Mahadevaiah, C., Padmanabhan, T. S., Alagarasan, G., Suresha, G., et al. (2020). Root transcriptome analysis of Saccharum spontaneum uncovers  key  genes  and  pathways  in  response  to  low-temperature  stress. Environ.  Exp.  Bot. 171:103935.  doi:  10.1016/j.envexpbot.2019.103935
- D'Hont, A., Ison, D., Alix, K., Roux, C., and Glaszmann, J. C. (1998). Determination of basic chromosome numbers in the genus Saccharum by  physical mapping of  ribosomal  RNA  genes. Genome 41,  221-225.  doi:  10.1139/g98-023
- Ding,  Z., Fu, L., Tan, D., Sun, X., and  Zhang,  J. (2020). An  integrative transcriptomic  and  genomic  analysis  reveals  novel  insights  into  the  hub genes and  regulatory networks  associated with rubber synthesis in H. brasiliensis . Ind.  Crop.  Prod. 153:112562.  doi:  10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112562
- Dugas,  D.  V .,  Monaco,  M.  K.,  Olson,  A.,  Klein,  R.  R.,  Kumari,  S.,  Ware,  D., et  al.  (2011).  Functional  annotation  of  the  transcriptome  of Sorghum bicolor

- in  response  to  osmotic  stress  and  abscisic  acid. BMC Genomics 12:514.  doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-514
- Dunn,  R.,  Dudbridge,  F.,  and  Sanderson,  C.  M.  (2005).  The  use  of  edgebetweenness clustering to investigate biological function in protein interaction networks. BMC  Bioinformatics 6:39.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2105-6-39
- Eddy,  S.  R.  (1998).  Profile  hidden  Markov  models. Bioinformatics 14,  755-763. doi:  10.1093/bioinformatics/14.9.755
- Edgar, R. C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and  high  throughput. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 32,  1792-1797.  doi:  10.1093/nar/ gkh340
- El-Gebali,  S.,  Mistry,  J.,  Bateman,  A.,  Eddy,  S.  R.,  Luciani,  A.,  Potter,  S.  C., et  al.  (2019).  The  Pfam  protein  families  database  in  2019. Nucleic  Acids Res. 47,  D427-D432.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gky995
- Falco, M.  C., Marbach,  P. A. S., Pompermayer,  P.,  Lopes, F. C. C.,  and Silva-Filho,  M.  C.  (2001).  Mechanisms  of  sugarcane  response  to  herbivory. Genet.  Mol.  Biol. 24,  113-122.  doi:  10.1590/S1415-47572001000100016
- FAO (2020). FAOSTAT: production sheet. Available at: http://www.fao.org/faostat/ en/#data  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Ficklin,  S.  P .,  and  Feltus,  F .  A.  (2011).  Gene  coexpression  network  alignment and  conservation  of  gene  modules  between  two  grass  species:  maize  and rice. Plant  Physiol. 156,  1244-1256.  doi:  10.1104/pp.111.173047
- Finn, R. D., Clements, J., and Eddy, S. R. (2011). HMMER web server: interactive sequence similarity searching. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, W29-W37. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkr367
- Freeling,  M.  (2009).  Bias  in  plant  gene  content  following  different  sorts  of duplication:  tandem,  whole-genome,  segmental,  or  by  transposition. Annu. Rev.  Plant  Biol. 60,  433-453.  doi:  10.1146/annurev.arplant.043008.092122
- Freeling, M., Scanlon, M.  J., and  Fowler, J. E. (2015). Fractionation  and subfunctionalization  following  genome  duplications:  mechanisms  that  drive gene  content  and  their  consequences. Curr.  Opin.  Genet.  Dev. 35,  110-118. doi:  10.1016/j.gde.2015.11.002
- Gaut, B. S., Morton, B. R., McCaig, B. C., and Clegg, M. T. (1996). Substitution rate  comparisons  between  grasses  and  palms:  synonymous  rate  differences at  the  nuclear  gene  Adh  parallel  rate  differences  at  the  plastid  gene  rbc  L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 10274-10279. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.19.10274
- Goel,  P .,  Sharma,  N.  K.,  Bhuria,  M.,  Sharma,  V .,  Chauhan,  R.,  Pathania,  S., et  al.  (2018).  Transcriptome  and  co-expression  network  analyses  identify key  genes  regulating  nitrogen  use  efficiency  in Brassica  juncea L. Sci.  Rep. 8,  1-18.  doi:  10.1038/s41598-018-25826-6
- Goodstein,  D.  M.,  Shu,  S.,  Howson,  R.,  Neupane,  R.,  Hayes,  R.  D.,  Fazo,  J., et  al.  (2012).  Phytozome:  a  comparative  platform  for  green  plant  genomics. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40,  D1178-D1186.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr944
- Gregory, P. J., Johnson, S. N., Newton, A. C., and Ingram, J. S. (2009). Integrating pests  and  pathogens  into  the  climate  change/food  security  debate. J.  Exp. Bot. 60,  2827-2838.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erp080
- Grivet,  L.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2002).  Sugarcane  genomics:  depicting  the  complex genome  of  an  important  tropical  crop. Curr.  Opin.  Plant  Biol. 5,  122-127. doi:  10.1016/S1369-5266(02)00234-0
- Guo,  H.,  Jiao,  Y.,  Tan,  X.,  Wang,  X.,  Huang,  X.,  Jin,  H.,  et  al.  (2019).  Gene duplication  and  genetic  innovation  in  cereal  genomes. Genome  Res. 29, 261-269.  doi:  10.1101/gr.237511.118
- Hanada,  K.,  Zou,  C.,  Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  Shinozaki,  K.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2008). Importance  of  lineage-specific  expansion  of  plant  tandem  duplicates  in  the adaptive  response  to  environmental  stimuli. Plant  Physiol. 148,  993-1003. doi:  10.1104/pp.108.122457
- Hanks, S. K., and Hunter, T. (1995). The eukaryotic protein kinase superfamily: kinase (catalytic) domain structure and classification 1. FASEB J. 9,  576-596. doi:  10.1096/fasebj.9.8.7768349
- Hasanuzzaman, M. (2020). Agronomic crops: Stress responses and tolerance .  New York,  NY:  Springer.
- Hoang,  N.  V.,  Furtado,  A.,  O'Keeffe,  A.  J.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and  Henry,  R.  J. (2017). Association of gene expression with biomass content and composition in  sugarcane. PLoS  One 12:e0183417.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0183417
- Hong, S., Chen, X., Jin, L., and Xiong, M. (2013). Canonical correlation analysis for RNA-seq co-expression networks. Nucleic Acids Res. 41:e95. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkt145
- Horton,  P .,  Park,  K.  J.,  Obayashi,  T.,  Fujita,  N.,  Harada,  H.,  Adams-Collier,  C., et  al.  (2007).  WoLF  PSORT:  protein  localization  predictor. Nucleic  Acids Res. 35,  W585-W587.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm259
- Hu,  W.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Shen,  Q.,  Zhang,  X.,  et  al.  (2018).  New insights  into  the  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  the  SWEET  family in Saccharum based  on  comparative  genomics. BMC Plant Biol. 18:270.  doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1495-y
- Huang,  T.  L.,  Huang,  L.  Y.,  Fu,  S.  F.,  Trinh,  N.  N.,  and  Huang,  H.  J.  (2014). Genomic profiling  of  rice  roots  with  short-and  long-term  chromium  stress. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 86,  157-170.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-014-0219-4
- Huang,  X.,  Song,  X.,  Chen,  R.,  Zhang,  B.,  Li,  C.,  Liang,  Y.,  et  al.  (2020). Genome-wide  analysis  of  the  DREB  subfamily  in Saccharum  spontaneum reveals  their  functional  divergence  during  cold  and  drought  stresses. Front. Genet. 10:1326.  doi:  10.3389/fgene.2019.01326
- Hunter,  T.  (1995).  Protein  kinases  and  phosphatases:  the  Yin  and  Yang  of protein phosphorylation  and  signaling. Cell 80, 225-236.  doi: 10.1016/ 0092-8674(95)90405-0
- ISO (2020). International sugar organization. Available at: https://www.isosugar. org/sugarsector/sugar  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Jain,  M.,  Li,  Q.  B.,  and  Chourey,  P .  S.  (2008).  Cloning  and  expression  analyses of sucrose non-fermenting-1-related kinase 1 (SnRK1b) gene during development  of  sorghum  and  maize  endosperm  and  its  implicated  role  in sugar-to-starch metabolic transition. Physiol. Plant. 134, 161-173. doi: 10.1111/j. 1399-3054.2008.01106.x
- Karpov, P. A., Sheremet, Y. A., Blume, Y. B., and Yemets, A. I. (2019). Studying the  role  of  protein  kinases  CK1  in  organization  of  cortical  microtubules  in Arabidopsis  thaliana root  cells. Cytol.  Genet. 53,  441-450.  doi:  10.3103/ S0095452719060033
- Kasirajan,  L.,  Valiyaparambth,  R.,  Velu,  J.,  Hari,  H.,  Srinivasavedantham,  V ., and Athaiappan, S. (2020). Gene expression studies of Saccharum spontaneum , a  wild  relative  of  sugarcane  in  response  to  salinity  stress. Biotechnol.  Appl. Biochem. doi:  10.1002/bab.1923  [Epub  ahead  of  print]
- Kebrom,  T.  H.,  McKinley,  B.,  and  Mullet,  J.  E.  (2017).  Dynamics  of  gene expression during development and expansion of vegetative stem internodes of bioenergy sorghum. Biotechnol. Biofuels 10, 1-16. doi: 10.1186/ s13068-017-0848-3
- Kim,  C.,  Wang,  X.,  Lee,  T.  H.,  Jakob,  K.,  Lee,  G.  J.,  and  Paterson,  A.  H. (2014).  Comparative analysis  of Miscanthus and Saccharum reveals  a  shared whole-genome  duplication  but  different  evolutionary  fates. Plant  Cell 26, 2420-2429.  doi:  10.1105/tpc.114.125583
- Kimura, M., and Ishikawa, T. (2018). Suppression of DYRK ortholog expression affects wax ester fermentation in Euglena gracilis . J. Appl. Phycol. 30, 367-373. doi:  10.1007/s10811-017-1235-y
- Kleinberg,  J.  M.  (1999).  Authoritative  sources  in  a  hyperlinked  environment. J.  ACM 46,  604-632.  doi:  10.1145/324133.324140
- Kolde,  R.,  and  Kolde,  M.  R.  (2015).  Package  'pheatmap' .  R  Package  1,  790. Krogh, A., Larsson, B., Von Heijne, G., and Sonnhammer, E. L. (2001). Predicting transmembrane  protein  topology  with  a  hidden  Markov  model:  application to complete genomes. J.  Mol. Biol. 305, 567-580. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315 Krzywinski,  M.,  Schein,  J.,  Birol,  I.,  Connors,  J.,  Gascoyne,  R.,  Horsman,  D., et  al.  (2009).  Circos:  an  information  aesthetic  for  comparative  genomics. Genome  Res. 19,  1639-1645.  doi:  10.1101/gr.092759.109
- Lalman,  J.  A.,  Shewa,  W .  A.,  Gallagher,  J.,  and  Ravella,  S.  (2016).  'Biofuels production  from  renewable  feedstocks'  in Quality  living  through  chemurgy and  green  chemistry .  ed.  P .  C.  K.  Lau  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  193-220. Lee,  T.,  Kim,  H.,  and  Lee,  I.  (2015).  Network-assisted  crop  systems  genetics: network inference and integrative analysis. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 24,  61-70. doi:  10.1016/j.pbi.2015.02.001
- Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2012).  Diversity,  classification  and  function of  the  plant  protein  kinase  superfamily. Philos.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  B:  Biol.  Sci. 367,  2619-2639.  doi:  10.1098/rstb.2012.0003
- Leinonen, R., Sugawara, H., Shumway, M., and International Nucleotide Sequence Database  Collaboration  (2010).  The  sequence  read  archive. Nucleic  Acids Res. 39,  D19-D21.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkq1019
- Li, Z., Hua, X., Zhong, W ., Yuan, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., et al. (2020). Genomewide  identification  and  expression  profile  analysis  of  WRKY  family  genes in the autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum . Plant Cell Physiol. 61,  616-630. doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcz227
- Li,  M.,  Liang,  Z.,  Zeng,  Y .,  Jing,  Y .,  Wu,  K.,  Liang,  J.,  et  al.  (2016b).  De  novo analysis  of  transcriptome  reveals  genes  associated  with  leaf  abscission  in sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). BMC Genomics 17:195.  doi:  10.1186/ s12864-016-2552-2

- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  Liang,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Liu,  X.,  et  al.  (2016a). Differential  expression  profiles  and  pathways  of  genes  in  sugarcane  leaf  at elongation stage in response to drought stress. Sci. Rep. 6:25698. doi: 10.1038/ srep25698
- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Wang,  Z.,  Liang,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  et  al.  (2017). Molecular  characterization  and  co-expression  analysis  of  the  SnRK2  gene family  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-12.  doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16152-4
- Li,  J.,  Tang,  W .,  Zhang,  Y .  W .,  Chen,  K.  N.,  Wang,  C.,  Liu,  Y .,  et  al.  (2018). Genome-wide  association  studies  for  five  forage  quality-related  traits  in sorghum ( Sorghum bicolor L.). Front. Plant Sci. 9:1146. doi: 10.3389/ fpls.2018.01146
- Li,  L.  B.,  Zhang,  Y .  R.,  Liu,  K.  C.,  Ni,  Z.  F .,  Fang,  Z.  J.,  Sun,  Q.  X.,  et  al. (2010).  Identification  and  bioinformatics  analysis  of  SnRK2  and  CIPK  family genes in sorghum. Agric. Sci. China 9, 19-30. doi: 10.1016/S1671-2927(09)60063-8
- Ling,  H.,  Huang,  N.,  Wu,  Q.,  Su,  Y.,  Peng,  Q.,  Ahmed,  W .,  et  al.  (2018). Transcriptional insights into the sugarcane-sorghum mosaic virus interaction. Trop.  Plant  Biol. 11,  163-176.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-018-9210-6
- Liu,  J.,  Chen,  N.,  Grant,  J.  N.,  Cheng,  Z.  M.,    Stewart,  C.  N.  Jr.,  and  Hewezi,  T. (2015). Soybean kinome: functional classification and gene expression patterns. J.  Exp.  Bot. 66,  1919-1934.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/eru537
- Mace,  E.  S.,  and  Jordan,  D.  R.  (2011).  Integrating  sorghum  whole  genome sequence  information  with  a  compendium  of  sorghum  QTL  studies  reveals uneven  distribution of QTL  and  of gene-rich regions with significant implications for crop improvement. Theor. Appl. Genet. 123:169. doi: 10.1007/ s00122-011-1575-y
- Magadum,  S.,  Banerjee,  U.,  Murugan,  P .,  Gangapur,  D.,  and  Ravikesavan,  R. (2013). Gene duplication as a major force in evolution. J. Genet. 92, 155-161. doi:  10.1007/s12041-013-0212-8
- Makita,  Y.,  Shimada,  S.,  Kawashima,  M.,  Kondou-Kuriyama,  T.,  Toyoda,  T., and  Matsui,  M.  (2015).  MOROKOSHI:  transcriptome  database  in Sorghum bicolor . Plant  Cell  Physiol. 56:e6.  doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcu187
- Mall,  R.,  Ullah,  E.,  Kunji,  K.,  D' Angelo,  F.,  Bensmail,  H.,  and  Ceccarelli,  M. (2017).  'Differential  community  detection  in  paired  biological  networks, ' in Proceedings  of  the  8th  ACM  International  Conference  on  Bioin-formatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics; August 20-23, 2017; Massachusetts,  MA:  ACM,  330-339.
- Mancini, M. C., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Sforça, D. A., and de Souza, A. P . (2018). 'Targeted sequencing by gene synteny,' a new strategy for polyploid species: sequencing  and  physical  structure  of  a  complex  sugarcane  region. Front. Plant  Sci. 9:397.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2018.00397
- Manning, G., Plowman, G. D., Hunter, T., and Sudarsanam, S. (2002). Evolution of  protein  kinase  signaling  from  yeast  to  man. Trends  Biochem.  Sci. 27, 514-520.  doi:  10.1016/S0968-0004(02)02179-5
- Marquardt,  A.,  Scalia,  G.,  Wathen-Dunn,  K.,  and  Botha,  F.  C.  (2017).  Yellow canopy  syndrome  (YCS)  in  sugarcane  is  associated  with  altered  carbon partitioning in the leaf. Sugar Tech 19, 647-655. doi: 10.1007/s12355-017-0555-1
- Meng,  X.,  and  Zhang,  S.  (2013).  MAPK  cascades  in  plant  disease  resistance signaling. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 51, 245-266. doi: 10.1146/annurevphyto-082712-102314
- Miller, M., Pfeiffer, W ., and Schwartz, T. (2010). 'Creating the cipres science gateway for inference of large phylogenetic trees' in 2010 Gateway Computing Environments Workshop  (GCE) ;  November  14,  2010;  New  Orleans,  LA:  IEEE,  1-8.
- Min, X. J. (2013). ASFinder: a tool for genome-wide identification of alternatively splicing transcripts from EST-derived sequences. Int. J. Bioinforma. Res. Appl. 9,  221-226.  doi:  10.1504/IJBRA.2013.053603
- Min,  X.  J.,  Powell,  B.,  Braessler,  J.,  Meinken,  J.,  Yu,  F.,  and  Sablok,  G.  (2015). Genome-wide cataloging and analysis of alternatively spliced genes in cereal crops. BMC  Genomics 16:721.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-015-1914-5
- Mitra,  K.,  Carvunis,  A.  R.,  Ramesh,  S.  K.,  and  Ideker,  T.  (2013).  Integrative approaches  for  finding  modular  structure  in  biological  networks. Nat.  Rev. Genet. 14,  719-732.  doi:  10.1038/nrg3552
- Moniz, L., Dutt, P .,  Haider,  N.,  and  Stambolic,  V .  (2011).  Nek  family  of  kinases in cell cycle, checkpoint control and cancer. Cell Div. 6:18. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-6-18
- Monreal, J. A., Arias-Baldrich, C., Pérez-Montaño, F., Gandullo, J., Echevarría, C., and García-Mauriño, S. (2013). Factors involved in the rise of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase-kinase activity caused by salinity in sorghum leaves. Planta 237,  1401-1413.  doi:  10.1007/s00425-013-1855-7
- Mutti,  J.  S.,  Bhullar,  R.  K.,  and  Gill,  K.  S.  (2017).  Evolution  of  gene  expression balance  among  homeologs  of  natural  polyploids. G3 7,  1225-1237.  doi: 10.1534/g3.116.038711
- Nagaraju, M., Reddy, P. S., Kumar, S. A., Kumar, A., Rajasheker, G., Rao, D. M., et  al.  (2020).  Genome-wide  identification  and  transcriptional  profiling  of small  heat  shock  protein  gene  family  under  diverse  abiotic  stress  conditions in Sorghum bicolor (L.). Int.  J.  Biol.  Macromol. 142,  822-834.  doi:  10.1016/j. ijbiomac.2019.10.023
- Nhiri,  M.,  Bakrim,  N.,  Pacquit,  V .,  Hachimi-Messouak,  Z.  E.,  Osuna,  L.,  and Vidal, J. (1998). Calcium-dependent and -independent phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinases in sorghum leaves: further evidence for the involvement of the calcium-independent protein kinase in the in situ regulatory phosphorylation  of  c4  phosphoenolpyruvate  carboxylase. Plant  Cell  Physiol. 39,  241-246.  doi:  10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029363
- Niedner,  R.  H.,  Buzko,  O.  V .,  Haste,  N.  M.,  Taylor,  A.,  Gribskov,  M.,  and Taylor,  S.  S.  (2006).  Protein  kinase  resource:  an  integrated  environment  for phosphorylation  research. Proteins 63,  78-86.  doi:  10.1002/prot.20825
- Okura,  V.  K.,  de  Souza,  R.  S.,  de  Siqueira  Tada,  S.  F.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2016). BAC-pool  sequencing  and  assembly  of  19  Mb  of  the  complex  sugarcane genome. Front.  Plant  Sci. 7:342.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00342
- Pagariya,  M.  C.,  Devarumath,  R.  M.,  and  Kawar,  P .  G.  (2012).  Biochemical characterization and identification of differentially expressed candidate genes in salt stressed sugarcane. Plant Sci. 184, 1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.12.002
- Panje, R. R., and  Babu,  C.  N. (1960). Studies in Saccharum  spontaneum distribution and geographical association of chromosome numbers. Cytologia 25,  152-172.  doi:  10.1508/cytologia.25.152
- Papini-Terzi,  F. S., Rocha,  F.  R., Nicoliello Vêncio,  R.  Z., Oliveira, K. C., de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Vicentini,  R.,  et  al.  (2005).  Transcription  profiling  of signal  transduction-related  genes  in  sugarcane  tissues. DNA Res. 12,  27-38. doi:  10.1093/dnares/12.1.27
- Parra-Londono, S., Fiedler, K., Kavka, M., Samans, B., Wieckhorst, S., Zacharias, A., et  al.  (2018).  Genetic  dissection  of  early-season  cold  tolerance  in  sorghum: genome-wide association studies for seedling emergence and survival under field and controlled environment conditions. Theor. Appl. Genet. 131, 581-595. doi:  10.1007/s00122-017-3021-2
- Patade,  V .  Y.,  Rai,  A.  N.,  and  Suprasanna,  P .  (2011).  Expression  analysis  of sugarcane shaggy-like kinase (SuSK) gene identified through cDNA subtractive hybridization  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Protoplasma 248, 613-621.  doi:  10.1007/s00709-010-0207-8
- Paterson,  A.  H.,  Bowers,  J.  E.,  Bruggmann,  R.,  Dubchak,  I.,  Grimwood,  J., Gundlach, H., et al. (2009). The Sorghum bicolor genome and the diversification of  grasses. Nature 457,  551-556.  doi:  10.1038/nature07723
- Patro,  R.,  Duggal,  G.,  and  Kingsford,  C.  (2015).  Salmon:  accurate,  versatile and ultrafast quantification from RNA-seq data using lightweight-alignment. Biorxiv  [preprint].  doi:  10.1101/021592
- Paungfoo-Lonhienne, C., Lonhienne, T. G., Yeoh, Y. K., Donose, B. C., Webb, R. I., Parsons,  J.,  et  al.  (2016).  Crosstalk  between  sugarcane  and  a  plant-growth promoting Burkholderia species. Sci.  Rep. 6:37389.  doi:  10.1038/srep37389
- Pei,  G.  L.,  Jun,  G.,  Wang,  Q.  H.,  and  Kang,  Z.  S.  (2019).  Comparative  analysis of protein kinases and associated domains between Ascomycota and Basidiomycota . J. Integr. Agric. 18, 96-107. doi: 10.1016/S2095-3119(18)62022-2
- Pestenácz, A., and Erdei, L. (1996). Calcium-dependent protein kinase in maize and  sorghum  induced  by  polyethylene  glycol. Physiol.  Plant. 97,  360-364. doi:  10.1034/j.1399-3054.1996.970221.x
- Petersen, T. N., Brunak, S., Von Heijne, G., and Nielsen, H. (2011). SignalP 4.0: discriminating  signal  peptides  from  transmembrane  regions. Nat.  Methods 8,  785-786.  doi:  10.1038/nmeth.1701
- Premachandran,  M.  N.,  Prathima,  P .  T.,  and  Lekshmi,  M.  (2011).  Sugarcane and  polyploidy:  a  review. J.  Sugarcane  Res. 1,  1-15.
- Price,  M.  N.,  Dehal,  P .  S.,  and  Arkin,  A.  P .  (2010).  FastTree  2-approximately maximum-likelihood  trees  for  large  alignments. PLoS  One 5:e9490.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009490
- Raghavan, U. N., Albert, R., and Kumara, S. (2007). Near linear time algorithm to detect community structures in large-scale networks. Phys. Rev. E 76:036106. doi:  10.1103/PhysRevE.76.036106
- R  Core  Team  (2013). R:  A  language  and  environment  for  statistical  computing . Vienna,  Austria:  R  Foundation  for  Statistical  Computing.
- Santa Brigida, A. B., Rojas, C. A., Grativol, C., de Armas, E. M., Entenza, J. O., Thiebaut,  F.,  et  al.  (2016).  Sugarcane  transcriptome  analysis  in  response  to

- infection caused by Acidovorax avenae subsp. avenae. PLoS One 11:e0166473. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0166473
- Schmutz,  J.,  Cannon,  S.  B.,  Schlueter,  J.,  Ma,  J.,  Mitros,  T.,  Nelson,  W .,  et  al. (2010).  Genome  sequence  of  the  palaeopolyploid  soybean. Nature 463, 178-183.  doi:  10.1038/nature08670
- Serin,  E.  A.  R.,  Nijveen,  H.,  Hilhorst,  H.  W .  M.,  and  Ligterink,  W .  (2016). Learning  from  co-expression  networks:  possibilities  and  challenges. Front. Plant  Sci. 7:444.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00444
- Serna-Saldívar, S. O., Chuck-Hernández, C., Pérez-Carrillo, E., and Heredia-Olea, E. (2012).  'Sorghum  as  a  multifunctional  crop  for  the  production  of  fuel ethanol:  current  status  and  future  trends'  in Bioethanol .  ed.  M.  A.  P .  Lima (Rijeka,  Croatia:  IntechOpen),  51-74.
- Sforça, D. A., Vautrin, S., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Mancini, M. C., Romero-da Cruz, M. V., and Pereira, G. d. S., et al.  (2019). Gene duplication in  the  sugarcane  genome:  a  case  study  of  allele  interactions  and  evolutionary patterns in two genic regions. Front. Plant Sci. 10:553. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00553
- Shi,  Y .,  Xu,  H.,  Shen,  Q.,  Lin,  J.,  W ang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  et  al.  (2019).  Comparative analysis  of  SUS  gene  family  between Saccharum  officinarum and Saccharum spontaneum . Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  174-185.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09230-6
- Singh,  D.  K.,  Calviño,  M.,  Brauer,  E.  K.,  Fernandez-Pozo,  N.,  Strickler,  S., Yalamanchili,  R.,  et  al.  (2014).  The  tomato  kinome  and  the  tomato  kinase library ORFeome:  novel  resources  for  the  study  of  kinases and  signal transduction  in  tomato  and  solanaceae  species. Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 27,  7-17.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-08-13-0218-TA
- Sperschneider, J., Catanzariti, A.-M., DeBoer, K., Petre, B., Gardiner, D. M., Singh, K. B., et  al.  (2017).  LOCALIZER:  subcellular  localization  prediction  of  both  plant  and effector  proteins  in  the  plant  cell. Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-14.  doi:  10.1038/srep44598
- Srivastava,  S.,  and  Kumar,  P .  (2020).  ' Abiotic  stress  responses  and  tolerance mechanisms  for  sustaining  crop  productivity  in  sugarcane'  in Agronomic crops .  eds.  S.  Naz,  Z.  Fatima,  P .  Iqbal,  A.  Khan,  I.  Zakir,  S.  Noreen  et  al. (Singapore:  Springer),  29-47.
- Su, W., Huang, L., Ling, H., Mao, H., Huang, N., Su, Y., et al. (2020b). Sugarcane calcineurin B-like (CBL) genes play important but versatile roles in regulation of  responses  to  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses. Sci.  Rep. 10,  1-13.  doi:  10.1038/ s41598-019-57058-7
- Su,  W.,  Ren,  Y.,  Wang,  D.,  Su,  Y.,  Feng,  J.,  Zhang,  C.,  et  al.  (2020a).  The alcohol  dehydrogenase  gene  family  in  sugarcane  and  its  involvement  in cold stress regulation. BMC Genomics 21:521. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-06929-9
- Supek, F., Bo š njak,  M., Š kunca, N., and Š muc, T. (2011). REVIGO summarizes and  visualizes  long  lists  of  gene  ontology  terms. PLoS  One 6:e21800.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021800
- Tai,  Y.,  Liu,  C.,  Yu,  S.,  Y ang,  H.,  Sun,  J.,  Guo,  C.,  et  al.  (2018).  Gene  coexpression network analysis reveals coordinated regulation of three characteristic secondary  biosynthetic pathways  in tea plant ( Camellia sinensis ). BMC Genomics 19:616.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-018-4999-9
- Takatani,  S.,  Otani,  K.,  Kanazawa,  M.,  Takahashi,  T.,  and  Motose,  H.  (2015). Structure, function, and evolution of plant NIMA-related kinases: implication for  phosphorylation-dependent  microtubule  regulation. J.  Plant  Res. 128, 875-891.  doi:  10.1007/s10265-015-0751-6
- Tan,  S.  T.,  and  Xue,  H.  W .  (2014).  Casein  kinase  1  regulates  ethylene  synthesis by  phosphorylating  and  promoting  the  turnover  of  ACS5. Cell  Rep. 9, 1692-1702.  doi:  10.1016/j.celrep.2014.10.047
- Teich,  R.,  Grauvogel,  C.,  and  Petersen,  J.  (2007).  Intron  distribution  in  Plantae: 500  million  years  of  stasis  during  land  plant  evolution. Gene 394,  96-104. doi:  10.1016/j.gene.2007.02.011
- Teixeira,  E.  I.,  Fischer,  G.,  van  Velthuizen,  H.,  Walter,  C.,  and  Ewert,  F.  (2013). Global  hot-spots  of  heat  stress  on  agricultural  crops  due  to  climate  change. Agric.  For.  Meteorol. 170,  206-215.  doi:  10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.09.002
- Thirugnanasambandam,  P.  P.,  Hoang,  N.  V .,  Furtado,  A.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and Henry,  R.  J.  (2017).  Association  of  variation  in  the  sugarcane  transcriptome with  sugar  content. BMC Genomics 18:909.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-017-4302-5
- Tuleski,  T.  R.,  Kimball,  J.,  Do  Amaral,  F.  P .,  Pereira,  T.  P .,  Tadra-Sfeir,  M.  Z., de  Oliveira  Pedrosa,  F.,  et  al.  (2020). Herbaspirillum  rubrisubalbicans as  a phytopathogenic  model  to  study  the  immune  system  of Sorghum  bicolor . Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 33,  235-246.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-06-19-0154-R
- UniProt  Consortium  (2007).  The  universal  protein  resource  (UniProt). Nucleic Acids  Res. 36,  D190-D195.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm895
- Usha Kiranmayee, K. N. S., Hash, C. T., Kavi Kishor, P . B., Ramu, P ., Sivasubramani, S., Sakhale,  S.  A.,  et  al.  (2017).  'Fine  mapping  of  stay-green  QTLs  on  sorghum
- chromosome SBI-10L-an approach from genome to phenome' in InterDrought-V ; February  21-25,  2017;  Hyderabad,  India:  ICRISAT,  235.
- Vaid,  N.,  Pandey,  P .  K.,  and  Tuteja,  N.  (2016).  'Lectin  receptor-like  kinases and their  emerging  role  in  abiotic  stress  tolerance'  in Abiotic  stress  response in  plants .  eds.  N.  Tuteja  and  S.  Gill  (Weinheim,  Germany:  Wiley-VCH Verlag  GmbH  &amp;  Co.),  456.
- van  Dam,  S.,  Vosa,  U.,  van  der  Graaf,  A.,  Franke,  L.,  and  de  Magalhaes,  J.  P . (2018).  Gene  co-expression  analysis  for  functional  classification  and  genedisease  predictions. Brief.  Bioinform. 19,  575-592.  doi:  10.1093/bib/bbw139
- Varberg,  J.  M.,  Coppens,  I.,  Arrizabalaga,  G.,  and  Gaji,  R.  Y.  (2018).  TgTKL1 is  a  unique  plant-like  nuclear  kinase  that  plays  an  essential  role  in  acute toxoplasmosis. MBio 9,  e00301-e00318.  doi:  10.1128/mBio.00301-18
- Varoquaux,  N.,  Cole,  B.,  Gao,  C.,  Pierroz,  G.,  Baker,  C.  R.,  Patel,  D.,  et  al. (2019).  Transcriptomic  analysis  of  field-droughted  sorghum  from  seedling to  maturity  reveals  biotic  and  metabolic  responses. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U.  S.  A. 116,  27124-27132.  doi:  10.1073/pnas.1907500116
- Vettore,  A.  L.,  da  Silva,  F.  R.,  Kemper,  E.  L.,  Souza,  G.  M.,  da  Silva,  A.  M., Ferro,  M.  I.  T.,  et  al.  (2003).  Analysis  and  functional  annotation  of  an expressed  sequence  tag  collection  for  tropical  crop  sugarcane. Genome  Res. 13,  2725-2735.  doi:  10.1101/gr.1532103
- Vicentini,  R.,  de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Dornelas,  M.  C.,  and  Menossi,  M.  (2009). Characterization  of  a  sugarcane  ( Saccharum spp.)  gene  homolog  to  the brassinosteroid  insensitive1-associated  receptor  kinase  1  that  is  associated to sugar content. Plant Cell Rep. 28, 481-491. doi: 10.1007/s00299-008-0656-0
- Vikal,  Y.,  Kaur,  A.,  Jindal,  J.,  Kaur,  K.,  Pathak,  D.,  Garg,  T.,  et  al.  (2020). Identification  of  genomic  regions  associated  with  shoot  fly  resistance  in maize  and  their  syntenic  relationships  in  the Sorghum genome. PLoS  One 15:e0234335.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0234335
- Villanueva,  R.  A.  M.,  and  Chen,  Z.  J.  (2019).  ggplot2:  elegant  graphics  for data analysis (2nd ed.). Meas. Interdiscip. Res. Pers. 17, 160-167. doi: 10.1080/15366367.2019.1565254
- Voorrips,  R.  E.  (2002).  MapChart:  software  for  the  graphical  presentation  of linkage  maps  and  QTLs. J.  Hered. 93,  77-78.  doi:  10.1093/jhered/93.1.77
- Wang,  H.,  Gu,  L.,  Zhang,  X.,  Liu,  M.,  Jiang,  H.,  Cai,  R.,  et  al.  (2018).  Global transcriptome  and  weighted  gene  co-expression  network  analyses  reveal hybrid-specific modules and candidate genes related to plant height development in  maize. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 98,  187-203.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-018-0763-4
- Wang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  Xu,  J.,  Chen,  Z.,  Fan,  T .,  Zeng,  Z.,  et  al.  (2019c).  Comparative genomics  revealed  the  gene  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  magnesium transporter families in Saccharum . BMC Genomics 20:83. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5437-3
- Wang,  J.,  Li,  Y.,  Zhu,  F.,  Ming,  R.,  and  Chen,  L.  Q.  (2019b).  Genome-wide analysis of nitrate  transporter  (nrt/npf)  family  in  sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Trop. Plant Biol. 12, 133-149. doi: 10.1007/s12042-019-09220-8
- Wang,  J.,  Roe,  B.,  Macmil,  S.,  Yu,  Q.,  Murray,  J.  E.,  Tang,  H.,  et  al.  (2010). Microcollinearity  between  autopolyploid  sugarcane  and  diploid  sorghum genomes. BMC  Genomics 11:261.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2164-11-261
- Wang,  Y.,  Tang,  H.,  DeBarry,  J.  D.,  Tan,  X.,  Li,  J.,  Wang,  X.,  et  al.  (2012). MCScanX: a toolkit for detection  and  evolutionary  analysis  of  gene  synteny and  collinearity. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40:e49.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr1293
- Wang,  H.,  Wang,  Y.,  Xiao,  N.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  M.,  Ming,  R.,  et  al.  (2019a). NAC transcription factors in autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum :  genomewide  identification,  expression  pattern  and  a  'Dry' orthologous  gene. Res.  Sq. 1-37  [Preprint].  doi:  10.21203/rs.2.17032/v1
- Wang,  T.  J.,  Wang,  X.  H.,  and  Yang,  Q.  H.  (2020).  Comparative  analysis  of drought-responsive transcriptome in different genotype Saccharum spontaneum L. Sugar  Tech 22,  411-427.  doi:  10.1007/s12355-019-00774-1
- Wei,  K.,  Wang,  Y.,  and  Xie,  D.  (2014).  Identification  and  expression  profile analysis  of  the  protein  kinase  gene  superfamily  in  maize  development. Mol. Breed. 33,  155-172.  doi:  10.1007/s11032-013-9941-x
- Xiong,  J.,  Cui,  X.,  Y uan,  X.,  Y u,  X.,  Sun,  J.,  and  Gong,  Q.  (2016).  The  hippo/STE20 homolog SIK1 interacts with MOB1 to regulate cell proliferation and cell expansion in Arabidopsis . J.  Exp.  Bot. 67,  1461-1475.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erv538
- Xu,  G.,  Guo,  C.,  Shan,  H.,  and  Kong,  H.  (2012).  Divergence  of  duplicate  genes in  exon-intron  structure. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A. 109,  1187-1192. doi:  10.1073/pnas.1109047109
- Xu,  S., Wang,  J., Shang,  H.,  Huang,  Y.,  Yao,  W .,  Chen,  B.,  et al.  (2018). Transcriptomic characterization and potential marker development of contrasting sugarcane cultivars. Sci. Rep. 8, 1-11. doi: 10.1038/ s41598-018-19832-x

- Yan,  J.,  Li,  G.,  Guo,  X.,  Li,  Y .,  and  Cao,  X.  (2018).  Genome-wide  classification, evolutionary analysis and gene expression patterns of the kinome in Gossypium . PLoS  One 13:e0197392.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0197392
- Yan, J., Su, P ., Wei, Z., Nevo, E., and Kong, L. (2017). Genome-wide identification, classification,  evolutionary  analysis  and  gene  expression  patterns  of  the protein  kinase  gene  family  in  wheat  and Aegilops  tauschii . Plant  Mol.  Biol. 95,  227-242.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-017-0637-1
- Yu,  C.  S.,  Chen,  Y.  C.,  Lu,  C.  H.,  and  Hwang,  J.  K.  (2006).  Prediction  of protein subcellular localization. Proteins 64, 643-651. doi: 10.1002/prot.21018
- Yu,  G.,  Smith,  D.  K.,  Zhu,  H.,  Guan,  Y.,  and  Lam,  T.  T.  Y.  (2017).  ggtree:  an R  package  for  visualization  and  annotation  of  phylogenetic  trees  with  their covariates  and  other  associated  data. Methods  Ecol.  Evol. 8,  28-36.  doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.12628
- Zhang,  Z.,  Li,  J.,  Zhao,  X.  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Wong,  G.  K.  S.,  and  Yu,  J.  (2006). KaKs_calculator: calculating Ka and Ks through model selection and model averaging. Genom. Proteom. Bioinform. 4, 259-263. doi: 10.1016/ S1672-0229(07)60007-2
- Zhang,  W.,  Lin,  J.,  Dong,  F.,  Ma,  Q.,  Wu,  S.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2019b).  Genomic and  allelic  analyses  of  laccase  genes  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  spontaneum L.). Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  219-229.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09239-x
- Zhang,  C.,  Wang,  J.,  Tao,  H.,  Dang,  X.,  Wang,  Y.,  Chen,  M.,  et  al.  (2015). FvBck1, a component of cell wall integrity MAP kinase pathway, is required for  virulence  and  oxidative  stress  response  in  sugarcane  Pokkah  Boeng pathogen. Front.  Microbiol. 6:1096.  doi:  10.3389/fmicb.2015.01096
- Zhang,  H.,  and  Yin,  T.  (2020).  Analysis  of  topology  properties  in  different tissues of poplar based on gene co-expression networks. Tree Genet. Genomes 16:6.  doi:  10.1007/s11295-019-1400-3
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Li,  L.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Chen,  Y.,  et  al.  (2019a). Recent  polyploidization  events  in  three Saccharum founding  species. Plant Biotechnol.  J. 17,  264-274.  doi:  10.1111/pbi.12962
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  X.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Hua,  X.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2018). Allele-defined genome of the autopolyploid sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Nat.  Genet. 50,  1565-1573.  doi:  10.1038/s41588-018-0237-2
- Zhao,  W.,  Langfelder,  P .,  Fuller,  T.,  Dong,  J.,  Li,  A.,  and  Hovarth,  S.  (2010). Weighted  gene  coexpression  network  analysis:  state  of  the  art. J.  Biopharm. Stat. 20,  281-300.  doi:  10.1080/10543400903572753
- Zhu,  K.,  Liu,  H.,  Chen,  X.,  Cheng,  Q.,  and  Cheng,  Z.  M.  M.  (2018a).  The kinome  of  pineapple:  catalog  and  insights  into  functions  in  crassulacean acid metabolism plants. BMC Plant Biol. 18:199. doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1389-z
- Zhu,  K.,  Wang,  X.,  Liu,  J.,  Tang,  J.,  Cheng,  Q.,  Chen,  J.  G.,  et  al.  (2018b). The  grapevine  kinome:  annotation,  classification  and  expression  patterns  in developmental  processes  and  stress  responses. Hortic.  Res. 5,  1-16.  doi: 10.1038/s41438-018-0027-0
- Zou,  X.,  Liu,  A.,  Zhang,  Z.,  Ge,  Q.,  Fan,  S.,  Gong,  W .,  et  al.  (2019).  Coexpression  network  analysis  and  hub  gene  selection  for  high-quality  fiber in  upland  cotton  ( Gossypium  hirsutum )  using  RNA  sequencing  analysis. Gene 10:119.  doi:  10.3390/genes10020119
- Zulawski, M., and Schulze, W. X. (2015). 'The plant kinome' in Plant Phosphoproteomics .  ed.  W .  Schulze  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  1-23.
- Zulawski,  M.,  Schulze,  G.,  Braginets,  R.,  Hartmann,  S.,  and  Schulze,  W .  X. (2014).  The Arabidopsis kinome:  phylogeny  and  evolutionary  insights  into functional diversification. BMC Genomics 15:548. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-548

Conflict  of  Interest: The  authors  declare  that  the  research  was  conducted  in the  absence  of  any  commercial  or  financial  relationships  that  could  be  construed as  a  potential  conflict  of  interest.

Copyright  ©  2021 Aono,  Pimenta,  Garcia,  Correr,  Hosaka,  Carrasco,  Cardoso-Silva, Mancini,  Sforça,  dos  Santos,  Nagai,  Pinto,  Landell,  Carneiro,  Balsalobre,  Quiles, Pereira,  Rodrigues  Alves  Margarido  and  de  Souza.  This  is  an  open-access  article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  in  other  forums  is  permitted,  provided  the original  author(s)  and  the  copyright  owner(s)  are  credited  and  that  the  original publication  in  this  journal  is  cited,  in  accordance  with  accepted  academic  practice. No  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  is  permitted  which  does  not  comply  with these  terms.
DATA AVAILABILITY
## DATA  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT

The  datasets  presented  in  this  study  can  be  found  in  online repositories. The names of the repositories and accession numbers can be found at: National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, PRJEB38368,  PRJNA681593,  PRJEB41560  and  PRJEB40481.
| Sugarcane      | Sugarcane         | Sugarcane            |
|----------------|-------------------|----------------------|
| Species        | Genotype          | Tissue               |
| S. officinarum | Badila De Java    | Culms                |
| S. officinarum | Criolla Rayada    | Leaves               |
| S. officinarum | White Transparent | Leaves               |
| S. robustum    | IJ76-318          | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-58           | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-88           | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | Krakatau          | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | SES205A           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | F36-819           | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | IACSP93-3046      | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | R570              | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB72454           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855113          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855156          | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855536          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB867515          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB92579           | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP79-1011         | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP80-3280         | Culms, leaves, roots |
| Saccharum sp.  | TUC71-7           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | US85-1008         | Leaves               |

| Species         | Genotype   | Tissue                                                                       |
|-----------------|------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Pollen, microspore, roots, ligule epidermial tissue, blade epidermial tissue |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Roots, shoots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Seeds, spikelets, top internodes                                             |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX642     | Leaves, roots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | R.07020    | Internodes 1-4                                                               |
| Sorghum bicolor | RTX430     | Leaves, roots                                                                |

| Aco            | Aquilegia coerulea                                                                                                           |
|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AGC            | Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (cAPK), cGMP-dependent protein kinase, and lipid signaling kinase families               |
| Aly            | Arabidopsis lyrata                                                                                                           |
| Ath            | Arabidopsis thaliana                                                                                                         |
| B-lectin       | D-mannose-binding lectin                                                                                                     |
| Bdi            | Brachypodium distachyon                                                                                                      |
| CAMK           | Calcium- and calmodulin-regulated kinase                                                                                     |
| Ccl            | Citrus clementina                                                                                                            |
| CDS            | DNA coding sequence                                                                                                          |
| CK1            | Casein kinase 1                                                                                                              |
| CMGC           | Cyclin-dependent kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, glycogen synthase kinase, and cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinase |
| Cpa            | Carica papaya                                                                                                                |
| Cre            | Chlamydomonas reinhardtii                                                                                                    |
| Csa            | Cucumis sativus                                                                                                              |
| Csi            | Citrus sinensis                                                                                                              |
| DUF26          | Domain of Unknown Function 26                                                                                                |
| Egr            | Eucalyptus grandis                                                                                                           |
| ER             | Endoplasmic reticulum                                                                                                        |
| GM             | Gene model                                                                                                                   |
| Gma            | Glycine max                                                                                                                  |
| GO             | Gene Ontology                                                                                                                |
| GUB            | Galacturonan-binding                                                                                                         |
| HMM            | Hidden Markov model                                                                                                          |
| IRE1           | Inositol-requiring kinase 1                                                                                                  |
| Ka             | Nonsynonymous substitution rates                                                                                             |
| Ks             | Synonymous substitution rates                                                                                                |
| LRR            | Leucine-rich repeat                                                                                                          |
| LRRNT          | Leucine-rich repeat N-terminal domain                                                                                        |
| Mes            | Manihot esculenta                                                                                                            |
| Mgu            | Mimulus guttatus                                                                                                             |
| Mtr            | Medicago truncatula                                                                                                          |
| MW             | Molecular weight                                                                                                             |
| MYA            | Million years ago                                                                                                            |
| Osa            | Oryza sativa kinase                                                                                                          |
| PEK            | Pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha                                                                               |
| PK             | Protein kinase                                                                                                               |
| pI             | Isoelectric point                                                                                                            |
| Ppa            | Physcomitrella patens                                                                                                        |
| Ppe Ptr        | Prunus persica Populus trichocarpa                                                                                           |
| Rco            | Ricinus communis                                                                                                             |
| RLK            | Receptor-like kinase                                                                                                         |
| S-locus-glycop |                                                                                                                              |
|                | S-locus glycoprotein                                                                                                         |
| Sit            | Setaria italica                                                                                                              |
| Smo            | Selaginella moellendorffii                                                                                                   |
|                | Saccharum spontaneum                                                                                                         |
| Ssp            |                                                                                                                              |
| STE TKL        | Serine/threonine kinase Tyrosine kinase-like kinase                                                                          |
| TPM            | Transcripts per million                                                                                                      |
| Vca            | Volvox carteri                                                                                                               |
| Vvi            | Vitis vinifera                                                                                                               |
| WAK WGD        | Wall-associated receptor kinase Whole-genome duplication                                                                     |
| Zma            | Zea mays                                                                                                                     |

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 16:54:26,625 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 16:54:26,631 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 16:54:26,631 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 16:54:26,631 - INFO - {"type": "function", "name": "extract_accessions", "parameters": {"text": "National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, PRJEB38368,  PRJNA681593,  PRJEB41560  and  PRJEB40481"}}
2025-10-28 16:54:26,632 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJEB40481/10.3389_fpls.2021.736797.pdf

2025-10-28 16:54:26,637 - INFO - detected formats: [<InputFormat.PDF: 'pdf'>]
2025-10-28 16:54:26,649 - INFO - Going to convert document batch...
2025-10-28 16:54:26,649 - INFO - Initializing pipeline for StandardPdfPipeline with options hash 5f7f6517f72f4ee63b4977e857fdeb61
2025-10-28 16:54:26,649 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:54:28,173 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:54:28,861 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:54:29,198 - INFO - Processing document 10.3389_fpls.2021.736797.pdf
2025-10-28 16:54:42,795 - INFO - Finished converting document 10.3389_fpls.2021.736797.pdf in 16.16 sec.
2025-10-28 16:54:42,837 - WARNING - Parameter `strict_text` has been deprecated and will be ignored.
2025-10-28 16:54:42,853 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.3389_fpls.2021.736797.pdf
2025-10-28 16:54:42,853 - INFO - Characters: 114714
2025-10-28 16:54:42,854 - INFO - Words (approx): 17149
2025-10-28 16:54:42,855 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 22293.7
2025-10-28 16:54:42,855 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 16:54:42,855 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 16:54:42,855 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        <!-- image -->

## Edited by:

Xiyin Wang,

Agricultural University of Hebei, China

## Reviewed by:

Yunjun Zhao,

Brookhaven National Laboratory (DOE), United States Aimin Wu, South China Agricultural University, China

## *Correspondence:

Gabriel Rodrigues Alves Margarido gramarga@usp.br

## Specialty section:

This article was submitted to Plant Bioinformatics, a section of the journal Frontiers in Plant Science

Received:

05 July 2021

Accepted:

22 November 2021

Published:

13 December 2021

## Citation:

Hosaka GK, Correr FH, da Silva CC, Sforça DA, Barreto FZ, Balsalobre TWA, Pasha A, de Souza AP, Provart NJ, Carneiro MS and Margarido GRA (2021) Temporal Gene Expression in Apical Culms Shows Early Changes in Cell Wall Biosynthesis Genes in Sugarcane. Front. Plant Sci. 12:736797. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.736797

<!-- image -->

## Temporal Gene Expression in Apical Culms Shows Early Changes in Cell Wall Biosynthesis Genes in Sugarcane

Guilherme Kenichi Hosaka 1 , Fernando Henrique Correr 1 , Carla Cristina da Silva 2 , Danilo Augusto Sforça 2 , Fernanda Zatti Barreto 3 , Thiago Willian Almeida Balsalobre 3 , Asher Pasha 4 , Anete Pereira de Souza 2 , Nicholas James Provart 4 , Monalisa Sampaio Carneiro 3 and Gabriel Rodrigues Alves Margarido 1 *

1 Luiz de Queiroz College of Agriculture (ESALQ), University of São Paulo (USP), Piracicaba, Brazil, 2 Center for Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering (CBMEG), University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil, 3 Plant Biotechnology Laboratory, Centre for Agricultural Sciences, Federal University of São Carlos (CCA-UFSCar), Araras, Brazil, 4 Department of Cell and Systems Biology, Centre for the Analysis of the Genome Evolution and Function, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada

Multiple genes in sugarcane control sucrose accumulation and the biosynthesis of cell wall components; however, it is unclear how these genes are expressed in its apical culms. To better understand this process, we sequenced mRNA from C 1 stem internodes collected from four genotypes with different concentrations of soluble solids. Culms were collected at four different time points, ranging from six to 12-month-old plants. Here we show differentially expressed genes related to sucrose metabolism and cell wall biosynthesis, including genes encoding invertases, sucrose synthase and cellulose synthase. Our results showed increased expression of invertases in IN84-58, the genotype with lower sugar and higher fiber content, as well as delayed expression of secondary cell wall-related cellulose synthase for the other genotypes. Interestingly, genes involved with hormone metabolism were differentially expressed across time points in the three genotypes with higher soluble solids content. A similar result was observed for genes controlling maturation and transition to reproductive stages, possibly a result of selection against flowering in sugarcane breeding programs. These results indicate that carbon partitioning in apical culms of contrasting genotypes is mainly associated with differential cell wall biosynthesis, and may include early modifications for subsequent sucrose accumulation. Co-expression network analysis identified transcription factors related to growth and development, showing a probable time shift for carbon partitioning occurred in 10-month-old plants.

Keywords: Saccharum , soluble solids, gene expression, co-expression network, RNA-seq

## INTRODUCTION

Brazil is the main sugarcane producer in the world, followed by India, Thailand and China (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2021). Sugarcane is the most efficient plant at accumulating sucrose (Waclawovsky et al., 2010) and is widely used as raw material for sugar and ethanol production. The bioethanol produced from sugarcane can reduce dependence on fossil fuels, which are limited resources responsible for increasing greenhouse gas emissions (Flugge et al., 2017).

December 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 736797

Currently used commercial sugarcane genotypes are hybrids, mainly between the species Saccharum officinarum and Saccharum spontaneum . The former was used because of its higher sugar content in its culms, and the latter for its robustness, resistance to diseases (Campos and Caligari, 2017) and abiotic stress tolerance (Zhang et al., 2018). Following hybridization, successive backcrossing with S. officinarum was used to increase sugar content yield, a process called 'nobilization' (Piperidis et al., 2020). These noble canes exhibit lower fiber content, thicker culms and recalcitrant flowering when compared to S. spontaneum (Kaffka and Grantz, 2014). Also, modern sugarcane cultivars ( Saccharum X officinarum ) are aneuploid and autopolyploid, with a basic ploidy level of 10x to 12x (Piperidis and D'Hont, 2020), resulting in a total genome size of roughly 10 Gbp (D'Hont, 2005).

Breeding for sugar accumulation has resulted in a sucrose content of 12-16% of the fresh weight and 50% in dry weight of mature culms (Bull and Glasziou, 1963). The accumulation of sucrose in sugarcane culms occurs by stopping the active growth and elongation in some internodes (Bindon and Botha, 2002). In mature culms, sucrose produced in mesophyll cells is unloaded to storage cells via the apoplast or symplast (Rae et al., 2005), the latter being the most frequent type of transport. This symplastic pathway can follow two routes: translocation of sucrose into the cell mediated by sucrose transporters located in the plasma membrane (Rae et al., 2005); or via sucrose hydrolyzation into fructose-6-P and UDP-glucose by acid invertases. Sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS) subsequently converts these two products into sucrose-P, which is next converted into sucrose by the activity of sucrose phosphate phosphatase (SPP) (Partida et al., 2021). A peak in sucrose levels is achieved at the end of the vegetative cycle, when this carbohydrate is used during flowering and seed production (Slewinski, 2012). For this reason, maturing and/or mature sugarcane culms are commonly used as material for the study of carbohydrate partitioning and metabolism related to sucrose accumulation (Verma et al., 2011b; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017). Immature culms arise from apical meristems and, in turn, are responsible for increasing the height and width of sugarcane culms by successive cell divisions (Moore and Botha, 2014), providing a backbone for the plant.

Immature (internode -1 to C 3), intermediate (internode C 5) and mature culms (internode C 9 or more) were previously compared in terms of gene expression changes between different maturation stages (Papini-Terzi et al., 2009; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017). Papini-Terzi et al. (2009) used cDNA microarrays to compare culms with low and high soluble solids content ( GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix), as well as mature culms vs. immature culms. Among the differentially expressed genes, the authors reported genes associated with hormone signaling, stress response, cell wall metabolism, calcium metabolism, protein kinases, protein phosphatases and transcription factors. Mature and immature culms are part of the source-sink tissues. Nevertheless, little is known about gene regulation in the latter, especially when comparing hybrids to wild-type genotypes that contrast in sugar content. A few papers report differences between these tissues and genotypes (Papini-Terzi et al., 2009; Nishiyama et al., 2014); however, they do not cover different periods of plant development. This type of study would also make it possible to investigate the interaction between genotypes and developmental period.

Gene co-expression networks can be used to provide complementary insights to differential expression analyses. These networks are based on pairwise correlations between the expression levels of genes across many samples, which are combined into a correlation matrix (Langfelder et al., 2013). From the correlations it is possible to identify expression profiles that can be related to certain biological processes (Usadel et al., 2009). In this regard, a combination of gene expression profiles and co-expression analysis can provide more information about gene expression in apical culms of contrasting genotypes of sugarcane. In this study, we aimed to investigate the transcriptional profiles of immature sugarcane culms one wild S. spontaneum accession and three sugarcane modern hybrids with varying contents of soluble solids.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Plant Material

We initially chose four genotypes representing different levels of soluble solids ( GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix) in a panel of Saccharum genotypes ( Supplementary Table 1 ). The soluble solids content was used as a proxy for sugar content, to classify each genotype as having very high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (VHB), high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (HB), low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (LB) or very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (VLB). We also considered the relevance of genotypes to previous genomic studies. Hybrids SP80-3280 and R570 have been widely used in genomic studies and IN84-58 is a commonly used representative of S. spontaneum (Partida et al., 2021). Genotype F36-819 is an important ancestor in Brazilian breeding programs, found in the pedigree of RB867515 (Barreto et al., 2019), currently one of the most grown cultivars. These genotypes are present in the Brazilian Panel of Sugarcane Genotypes (BPSG) (Barreto et al., 2019; Medeiros et al., 2020), which currently contains 254 genotypes, including representatives of wild Saccharum species, relevant cultivars for breeding programs and cultivars from other sugarcane producing countries. The plants in the field were grown in a randomized block design with four replicates, at the Federal University of São Carlos/Araras (22 GLYPH&lt;14&gt; 18 0 41.0 00 S, 47 GLYPH&lt;14&gt; 23 0 05.0 00 W, at an altitude of 611m) - São Paulo - Brazil.

We collected immature culms from the C 1 internode of three replicates of each genotype ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). We sampled plants at four evenly distributed time points: April (T1), June (T2), August (T3) and October (T4) of 2016, corresponding to 6-, 8-, 10-, and 12-month-old first ratoon plants. Hence, our experiment corresponded to a 4 GLYPH&lt;2&gt; 4 factorial design, with a total of 48 samples, which allowed the investigation of genotype by time point interaction. Tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 GLYPH&lt;14&gt; C until further processing.

## RNA Extraction and Sequencing

We extracted total RNA with the RNeasy Plant Mini kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, United States) following the manufacturer's instructions. We assessed RNA concentration

and the RNA integrity number (RIN) with the Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States).

Next, we generated mRNA libraries following the Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA kit protocol and sequenced the 48 libraries in six lanes of an Illumina HiSeq 2500 to generate paired-end reads (2 GLYPH&lt;2&gt; 100 bp).

## Quality Control, de novo Transcriptome Assembly and Functional Annotation

Weuse the same steps for quality control as Correr et al. (2020a). The resulting high quality reads were used for de novo assembly using TRINITY v.2.5.1 (Grabherr et al., 2011) considering the parameters as previously described by Correr et al. (2020b).

Weevaluated the assembly integrity by assessing N50 statistics and annotation completeness against the Viridiplantae and Sorghum bicolor protein database v.3.1.1 (Goodstein et al., 2012), with BUSCO v.3 (Simão et al., 2015) and TRINITY script of transcripts completeness, respectively.

The functional annotation was performed by aligning the de novo assembly with the non-redundant (nr) NCBI database, using BLASTX v.2.6.0 (Altschul et al., 1990) with an E-value cutoff of 10 GLYPH&lt;0&gt; 3 , with up to 20 top hits. Complementary information of INTERPROSCAN was included to assign protein functions to the annotation based on domains and protein families. We used BLAST2GO (Conesa et al., 2005) to combine the results of BLASTX and INTERPROSCAN, assigning Gene Ontology (GO) terms to the de novo assembly.

We used MAPMAN v.3.6.0 (Thimm et al., 2004) for further visualization of the processes and metabolic pathways. The functional classifications (bins) were assigned with MERCATOR v4.0 (Schwacke et al., 2019).

The R570 genome (Garsmeur et al., 2018) used in the coexpression analysis was re-annotated with the same parameters used for the transcriptome annotation. This functional annotation was also complemented with the information for transcription factors (TFs) retrieved from the Plant TFDB (Jin et al., 2017) and Grassius (Yilmaz et al., 2009) databases.

## Differential Expression and Functional Enrichment Analyses

We used SALMON v.0.13.1 (Patro et al., 2017) to quantify gene expression levels of the de novo assembly and the R package tximport (Soneson et al., 2015) to aggregate counts at the gene level. The differential expression analyses were performed with the EDGER package v.3.24.3 (Robinson et al., 2010). First, we used a filter of at least one count per million (CPM) in at least three samples aiming to filter out genes expressed at a low level. We then fitted the full model according to the factorial design, using as factors the GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix group and the time point of sample collection. Weinitially tested for marginal GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix group effects using the VLB group - IN84-58 - as the reference level. Next, we assessed the genotype by time interaction by comparing each time point for each genotype against the first sampling time (6-month-old) of the VLB group, applying a filter of LogCPM &gt; 1. For all the comparisons the null hypothesis H 0 V LogFC D 0 was tested, where LogFC corresponds to the logarithm of the fold change.

After correcting for multiple tests using the False Discovery Rate (FDR) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995), genes with p -value less than 0.05 were deemed as significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs).

Functional enrichment analyses were performed using DEGs from each test with the GOSEQ package v.1.42.0 (Young et al., 2010). The GO terms were considered significantly enriched when the FDR-adjusted p -value was less than 0.05. We validated the expression of four genes with RT-qPCR ( Supplementary Data 1 ).

## Construction of a Gene Co-expression Network and Identification of Highly Connected Hubs

We first used HISAT2 v.2.1.0 (Kim et al., 2015) to align the reads to the R570 genome (Garsmeur et al., 2018) and FEATURECOUNTS V.1.6.3 (Liao et al., 2014) was used to quantify the expression level of each gene. We constructed three coexpression networks based on the normalized CPM of the differentially expressed genes from the comparisons of time points T2, T3 and T4 against T1. To that end we used the Weighted Correlation Network Analysis (WGCNA v.1.68) package (Langfelder and Horvath, 2008). The adjacency matrix was calculated using b = 15 and the Topological Overlap Matrices (TOM) were calculated based on the adjacency matrix using a signed correlation, reducing noise and spurious associations. We used signed correlations because negative and positive correlations between genes reflect different modes of regulation of gene expression. We set the minimum number of genes inside a module to 250 and merged modules with a correlation higher than 0.75. Next, we exported nodes and edges to CYTOSCAPE v. 3.8.0 (Shannon et al., 2003). The top 30 highly connected hub nodes in the network were identified using the Maximal Click Centrality (MCC) function, available in the CYTOHUBBA (Chin et al., 2014).

## RESULTS

## RNA Sequencing, de novo Transcriptome Assembly and Characterization of Sequencing Libraries

The 48 sequencing libraries yielded a total of 3.2 billion reads, with library sizes ranging from 59 to 81 million reads. The quality processing step removed roughly 17% of the total reads ( Supplementary Table 2 ). High-quality reads were de novo assembled and generated 482,103 transcripts, representing a total of 190,356 unigenes with a transcript N50 length of 1,227 bp. The majority of unigenes were represented by one or a few isoforms, with 54.08%, 18.44%, and 7.89% of the unigenes with one, two or three isoforms, respectively ( Supplementary Figure 2 ).

Comparing the 190,356 orthologous unigenes against the Viridiplantae database, we found 64.9% complete sequences (92 single-copy and 184 duplicated BUSCOs), while 29.6% of unigenes represent fragmented sequences (126 BUSCOs) and 5.5% are missing (23 BUSCOs). Also, 57.13% of the sorghum

protein sequences (15,872 of 27,781) were covered by unigenes in at least 70% of their length ( Supplementary Table 3 ). The functional annotation assigned protein names to a total of 58,328 unigenes (or 30.64% of the total).

After removing genes expressed at low levels, our gene expression matrix encompassed 89,041 unigenes, which were initially used for exploratory data analysis of the sequenced libraries. We first used a multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot to assess similarities between the samples ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). The first MDS component separated the IN84-58 (VLB) samples from the others, while the second component mainly separated samples from F36-819 (LB) at the bottom and R570 (HB) at the top, the latter showing some overlap with SP80-3280 (VHB). It is interesting to note that 12month-old samples were more clearly separated from the other time points for every genotype. This observed grouping structure partly reflects patterns in the content of soluble solids, because the S. spontaneum genotype (IN84-58) showed a substantially lower phenotypic value, while the other three groups were more similar to each other. The VHB, HB and LB representatives are hybrids generated by crosses between the species S. officinarum and S. spontaneum , each undergoing different selective pressures in breeding programs.

## Differential Gene Expression and Functional Enrichment

We used the VLB ( S. spontaneum ) genotype as a reference against which to test for main effects of the LB, HB and VHB hybrids. In this test, 88.04% of the 89,041 expressed genes were differentially expressed in at least one group, with 44,036 commonly found among contrasts ( Figure 1A ). Also, roughly 6,000 of the DEGs were commonly found in each pairwise intersection between the GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix groups. This high number of shared DEGs is expected given that F36-819, R570 and SP803280 showed similar gene expression profiles when compared to IN84-58. This result may partly be explained because the VLB genotype is a wild accession, while the three remaining genotypes are hybrid sugarcane cultivars.

Next, we identified the biological processes enriched among DEGs for each different GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix group. We found 26, 20 and 21 enriched GO terms in the contrasts involving the VHB, HB and LB groups, respectively ( Figures 1B-D ). Genes annotated with terms relating to transposable elements (TE), such as DNAmediated transposition, transposition, and DNA recombination, were enriched in the three contrasts.

In all comparisons we found terms related to stress and signaling pathways, such as defense response, response to stimulus and signal transduction . Sugar accumulation or culm development can trigger the expression of genes involved with stress responses in sugarcane (Papini-Terzi et al., 2009). Also, considering that apical culms are actively growing organs, cell expansion occurs due to the reduction of osmotic potential by the accumulation of solutes. This then causes a differential gradient allowing the entry of water into the cell, resulting in an irreversible expansion of the cell (Wang and Ruan, 2013).

We performed additional tests to investigate pairwise differences between genotypes at different time points, using VLB in T1 as a reference treatment ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). In almost all scenarios the number of downregulated genes was higher than that of upregulated DEGs. We noticed that the comparison HB vs. VLB at time point T4 showed the highest number of DEGs.

## Sucrose Metabolism and Transport

We investigated genes previously associated with sucrose levels and often discussed in the relevant literature. The expression profiles of nearly all invertase genes showed negative log fold changes for all combinations of genotypes and time points, when the tests were significant. We also noticed positive log fold changes for two genes coding for soluble acid invertase (SAI) at T3 in VLB, compared to the reference ( Figure 2A ). These results indicate higher expression in the VLB group than in the other three genotypes. Indeed, genes annotated as cell wall invertase (CW-INV) and SAI showed substantially lower expression levels from the beginning of the experiment, in most cases persisting through T3 or T4. Because these enzymes are involved in the irreversible cleavage of sucrose into glucose and fructose, this may reflect more intense breakage of disaccharides in the VLB genotype to release raw material for subsequent synthesis of cell wall components.

We observed similar profiles for genes that encode sugar or sucrose transporters, with the majority showing lower expression in 6-month-old hybrids when compared to VLB at T1 ( Figure 2B ). We found ten members of the SWEET sugar transporter, with SWEET1a, 4, 13, 15, and 16 showing more marked changes over time, with mostly negative values of log fold change, especially in the first time points. For all genotypes, copies of the genes SWEET13 and SWEET16 had lower expression at T2 followed by a strong increase in expression. SWEET13 is reported to be more expressed than SWEET4, 15 and 16 in mature culms. Also, SWEET4 and SWEET16 are suggested to be exporters of sucrose or to be involved in sugar accumulation (Hu et al., 2018). This indicates a possible source for cell wall biosynthesis or initial sugar accumulation in the apical culms.

We did not observe major differences in the expression profiles of SPS genes ( Figure 2C ). However, SPS B showed positive but small values of log fold change for most of the treatments, except at T4 for VLB. Sucrose phosphate phosphatase (PrSPP3/SPP2) coding genes were differentially expressed in LB, HB and VHB, showing expression profiles with reduced expression at nearly all collection time points, except for HB and VHB at T4. Sucrose Synthase (SuSy) 1 and 3 showed decreasing log fold changes across time points in VLB, although the baseline expression at T1 for this genotype was higher than in the hybrids. Also, SuSy1 was more expressed in VHB, HB and LB than VLB at T2 and T4, as was the case for other members of this family. For yet other SuSy genes, VLB and HB showed negative values of log fold change when compared to the reference at T3 and T4 in most of cases ( Figure 2C ). We observed a similar expression profile between invertases and SuSys, suggesting a possible (complementary) sucrose cleavage activity. SuSy catalyzes a reversible cleavage of sucrose into

FIGURE 1 | Differential gene expression and functional enrichment results: (A) Venn diagram of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) found in tests for main effects. Enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms of the biological process category: (B) VHB vs. VLB contrast; (C) HB vs. VLB contrast; and (D) LB vs. VLB contrast. VHB: very high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, HB: high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix; LB: low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix; and VLB: very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix.

<!-- image -->

fructose and UDP-Glu, which are used for respiration and as cell wall components (Verma et al., 2011b).

Regarding the activity of trehalose-6-phosphate synthase (TPS) genes, the expression profiles of multiple members of this family showed negative values of log fold change in LB, HB

and VHB, particularly from 6- to 10-month-old plants. Also, different genotypes showed strong increased expression level of TPS1, 7, 10, and 11 at T4, revealing a change in the expression pattern in the latest collection time point ( Supplementary Figure 5 ). Trehalose-6-phosphate synthase catalyzes the first

FIGURE 2 | Expression profiles of genes related to sucrose metabolism. The x axis shows the age of plants (in months). The y axis corresponds to the log fold change in comparison to the very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (VLB) genotype in T1 (6-month-old plants). Each line represents a gene and the solid lines indicate genes with significant differential expression in at least at one time point, while dashed lines represent genes with no differential expression for a given genotype. The line width indicates the average expression level of each gene, with more highly expressed genes thicker. (A) Invertase genes, where CINV, CW-INV, NIN, and SAI correspond to cytosolic invertase, cell wall invertase, alkaline/neutral invertase and soluble acid invertase, respectively. (B) Genes responsible for sugar transport, with PST, SUT and SWEET corresponding to putative sugar transporter, sucrose transporter and bidirectional sugar transporter SWEET, respectively. (C) Genes involved in sucrose metabolism, where PrSPP, SPP, SPS and SuSy correspond to probable sucrose phosphate phosphatase, sucrose phosphate phosphatase, sucrose phosphate synthase and sucrose synthase, respectively. VLB: very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, LB: low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, HB: high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix and VHB: very high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix.

<!-- image -->

step in trehalose metabolism and is fundamental for embryo development (Eastmond et al., 2002), vegetative growth and transition to flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana (Van Dijken et al., 2004). Trehalose-6-phosphate (T6P) is an important signaling molecule and is associated with the protection of plants from abiotic stress (Garg et al., 2002). Also, T6P is linked to carbon partitioning (Delatte et al., 2011).

## Cell Wall Synthesis and Modification

We found 21 members of cellulose synthase (CesA) coding genes, six of these - CesA3, 4, 7, 8, 10, and 12 - showing more pronounced changes across time points ( Figure 3 ). The expression profile of CesA3 showed a positive (albeit relatively small) value of log fold change for all Brix groups at T1, with similar expression levels for the other time points. For

CesA4, CesA7, and CesA8 expression decreased over time for VLB, while it tended to increase for the other genotypes. All members of CesA10 and 12 showed increasing expression levels over time, but baseline expression of 6-month-old plants was higher for VLB. Because these CesAs are responsible for cellulose biosynthesis in secondary walls, and in most cases, the genotypes showed increasing expression levels across time points, this likely indicates ample synthesis of secondary cell walls in these young sugarcane culms. The fact that CesA10 and 12 showed higher expression for VLB at T1 is in agreement with its higher fiber phenotype.

Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) coding genes also revealed varying patterns of differential expression for different members of the family. The biggest changes occurred for those coding for probable CAD1 and a probable CAD6, which showed

FIGURE 3 | Expression profiles of genes related to the biosynthesis of cell wall components. The x axis shows the age of plants (in months). The y axis corresponds to the log fold change in comparison to the very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (VLB) genotype in T1 (6-month-old plants). Each line represents a gene and the solid lines indicate genes with significant differential expression in at least at one time point, while dashed lines represent genes with no differential expression for a given genotype. The line width indicates the average expression level of each gene, with more highly expressed genes thicker. CesA and CAD correspond to cellulose synthase and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase, respectively. VLB: very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, LB: low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, HB: high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix and VHB: very high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix.

<!-- image -->

negatives values of log fold change in almost all comparisons against VLB with six months ( Figure 3 ). Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase is a key enzyme in lignin biosynthesis (Sibout et al., 2005), and the higher expression in VLB for these young sugarcane culms shows that the differential accumulation of fiber can begin early in the development of culms. We observed the same pattern in other genes related to phenylpropanoid metabolism, which were downregulated in the hybrids in comparison to VLB ( Supplementary Figure 6 ). We also observed differences in the expression profiles of multiple genes encoding

FIGURE 4 | Expression profiles of genes related to hormone metabolism. Asterisks indicate genes with differential expression for a particular combination of genotype and time point. The age of plants in the x axis is shown in months. VLB: very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, LB: low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, HB: high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix and VHB: very high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix. All tests considered 6-month-old VLB as a reference group.

<!-- image -->

expansins, with many of them indicating differential expression (in both directions) in T1 and across time points ( Supplementary Figure 7 ). This likely reflects the expansion of cells in the apical culms of all genotypes, which may depend on different members of this gene family.

## Hormone Metabolism and Stress Responses

We investigated gene expression profiles of genes coding for proteins associated with hormone metabolism ( Figure 4 ) and stress responses ( Figure 5 ) based in previous studies (Mattiello et al., 2015; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017). We noticed that one of the genes coding for auxin response factor (ARF23like) and another coding for ARF75 showed strong main effects between genotypes, with increased expression level in the LB, HB, and VHB groups. Conversely, one ARF6a coding gene showed consistently lower expression levels for all the genotypes, when compared to VLB. ARFs are among the transcription factors responsible for controlling auxin response genes (Guilfoyle and Hagen, 2001), which in turn control cell expansion (Mockaitis and Estelle, 2004). In addition, ARF6a is reported to regulate photosynthesis, sugar accumulation and fruit development in Solanum lycopersicum (Yuan et al., 2019). These observations suggest that hybrid cultivars may be preparing the apical culms for future sugar accumulation.

Genes coding for ethylene-insensitive proteins showed varying expression patterns, with three representatives of ethylene insensitive 3 like 1 showing lower expression levels in many of the tested contrasts ( Figure 4 ). In particular, the LB, HB and VHB genotypes showed lower expression of these genes than VLB in the first collection, but expression levels increased over time. Conversely, the VLB genotype showed decreasing expression ( Figure 4 ). Members of ethylene insensitive 2 like (EIN2-like) showed positive values of log fold change at all time points for LB, HB and VHB, but constant expression for VLB. EIN2 rice mutants showed defective stalk development and shoot elongation (Jun et al., 2004), indicating a possible role of EIN2-like in increasing stalk size in hybrids for future sucrose accumulation. Finally, a gene coding for tassel seed 6 (TS6) also showed increased expression in the three hybrid genotypes. In maize this gene is related to sex determination and inflorescence pattern, and is also associated with delays in the development of the inflorescence meristem (Irish, 1997). The expression pattern we observed may reflect the selection against flowering of cultivars in sugarcane breeding.

We note that the majority of the genes investigated in this category showed main effects between genotypes, but little genotype time interaction, i.e. , their expression patterns were consistent across time points. Because they are mainly associated with plant development, sugar accumulation or the control of flowering, these profiles may indicate their involvement with regulating important phenotypic traits that have undergone selection after the crossing between S . officinarum and S. spontaneum .

Several transcription factors were identified, including members of the bZIP family ( Supplementary Figure 8 ), ABI5,

RISBZ3 and TRAB1 ( Figure 5 ). Among them, ABI5, RISBZ3 and TRAB1 showed evidence of differential expression in the initial time points for the three hybrids. The expression profile of ABI5 and TRAB1 showed reduced expression in the hybrids, while the expression of RISBZ3 was higher in these groups. In rice, ABI5 and TRAB1 are regulated by the hormone abscisic acid (ABA). ABI5 is linked to abiotic stress and plant pollen development (Zou et al., 2008), while TRAB1 controls maturation and dormancy in embryos (Hobo et al., 1999). Additionally, RISBZ3 is expressed during seed maturation (Onodera et al., 2001). The role of these transcription factors in regulating abiotic stress and maturation of meristematic tissues possibly reflects the selection performed in breeding programs to develop hybrid sugarcane genotypes.

Interestingly, most of the genes involved with stress response detected herein code for transposable elements (TEs), especially retrotransposons. Retrotransposon genes were mostly upregulated in LB, HB and VHB genotypes, with little interaction with time points ( Figure 5 ). Similarly, we observed virtually no difference in expression levels for the four VLB collections, with a few exceptions in the more mature 12-month-old plants. Because TEs are known to introduce mutations and create plasticity in plants (Lee and Kim, 2014), the apparent overexpression in LB, HB and VHB possibly reflects the interspecific hybridization and backcrossing events during the breeding history of the crop, which potentially caused widespread genomic modifications (Ming et al., 2010).

## Expression of Transcription Factors Over Time

In order to identify key transcription factors, we performed co-expression analyses using DEGs from pairwise comparisons between time points - 8-, 10-, and 12-month-old plants, each compared against the baseline of 6-month-old samples. Highly connected genes of each module were investigated as potential factors related to sugar accumulation and the top 30 genes were selected as candidate hub genes. In the comparison involving the T2 group ( Figure 6A ), we identified three TFs: B3 DNA binding domain (B3), probable WRKY transcription factor 31 (WRKY31) and ZmOrphan185.

Besides these TFs, we identified the genes Walls Are Thin (related to WAT1), Peroxidase 47 (PER47), cytochrome P450 709B2 (P450) and Cyclophilin 40 (CYP40). WAT1 and PER47 are related to cell wall biosynthesis (Tokunaga et al., 2009; Ranocha et al., 2010) and P450 to salt stress in A. thaliana (Mao et al., 2013). WAT1-related is regulated depending on the light period and is related to growth and secondary cell wall metabolism in A. thaliana (Ranocha et al., 2010). In turn, PER47 is involved in vessel lignification (Tokunaga et al., 2009). We also identified CYP40, which is necessary for the vegetative phase and floral morphogenesis of A. thaliana (Berardini et al., 2001). SWEET13 is involved in the process of sugar transport between source-sink tissues in the Saccharum genus (Hu et al., 2018). Flowering in sugarcane is a complex process and depends on the genotype, photoperiod and weather (Jadoski and Ono, 2011).

FIGURE 5 | Expression profiles of genes involved in response to stress. Asterisks indicate genes with differential expression for a particular combination of genotype and time point. The age of plants in the x axis is shown in months. VLB: very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, LB: low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix, HB: high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix and VHB: very high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix. All tests considered 6-month-old VLB as a reference group.

<!-- image -->

Among the TFs found in the network constructed for T3 ( Figure 6B ), we found Far-Red Impaired Response1 (FAR1), HSF family protein (HSF) and ZmOrphan139. FAR1 interacts with its homolog Far-Red Elongated Hypocotyls3 (FHY3), regulating the circadian clock, flowering time (Li et al., 2011), plant defense (Wang et al., 2016), oxidative stress (Ma et al., 2016) and many other processes in A. thaliana . HSF also responds especially to heat stress (Nover et al., 2001). In addition, this network revealed many genes related to cell wall metabolism, including Endoglucanase 7 (GLU 10),

FIGURE 6 | Gene co-expression network of the top 30 hub genes, as indicated by the maximal clique centrality. The node sizes represent the degree of correlation with other genes. Light orange, light blue, green, yellow, orange nodes represent cell wall related, sucrose related, transcription factor, growth and development related and stress related genes, respectively. The edges represent interactions between genes and their width indicates the corresponding weight. (A) Comparison of T2 (8-months) against T1 (6-month-old plants). (B) Comparison of T3 (10-months) against T1. (C) Comparison T4 (12-months) vs. T1.

<!-- image -->

CAD, WAT1-related, CesA7, CesA8, Glucuronoxylan 4-Omethyltransferase 2 (GXM2), Acyltransferase 4 (AT 4), Protein IRX15-LIKE (IRX15-L) and O-methyltransferase (OMT).

In this comparison, we also found genes responsive to stress such as E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase XB3 (XB3), NDR1/HIN1like protein 6 (NHL6), plasma membrane-associated cationbinding protein 1 (PCAP1) and putative glutamic acid-rich protein. OMT participates in both process, cell wall metabolism and stress response. In A. thaliana , NHL6 is reported as being involved in the abiotic stress-induced by ABA mainly during seed germination and early seedling development (Bao et al., 2016).

Finally, the T4 comparison ( Figure 6C ) showed TFs also present in the previous comparisons. We also identified genes encoding a MYB family protein (MYB) and pentatricopeptide repeat protein-like gene (PPR). The homolog of the MYB is involved in controlling biotic (Segarra et al., 2009) and abiotic stress tolerance in A. thaliana (Jung et al., 2008), cell shape in Antirrhinum flowers (Noda et al., 1994) and flavonoid production (Hichri et al., 2011). Another TF identified is WRKY75, which is mainly related to phosphate deprivation in A. thaliana (Devaiah and Raghothama, 2007). Interestingly, a post-transcriptional factor PPR was identified, and mutants of this gene in rice showed albino phenotype and abnormal chloroplasts (Gong et al., 2014), with reduction of growth and development (Sung et al., 2010). As in the previously comparisons, we identified SWEET13 and WAT1-related. Furthermore, we found other genes related to growth and development such as callose synthase 3 (CALS3) and a receptorlike protein 12. CALS3 is expressed in the stele and root meristem during A. thaliana development (Vatén et al., 2011),

while receptor-like 12 is involved in the regulation of meristem maintenance in the same species (Wang et al., 2010).

As expected in the young apical culms, in these three co-expression networks we found TFs related to growth, development, biotic and abiotic stress responses, inflorescence development and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. Our hypothesis is that all time points after T1 presented metabolic changes, probably as a reflection of growth and cell expansion. In addition, T3 showed more genes related to cell wall metabolism showing a possible time shift for carbon partitioning in sugarcane.

## Sugarcane ePlant

We also have implemented a Sugarcane ePlant 1 at the BAR (BioAnalytic Resource for Plant Biology). ePlant is a compilation of programs, providing a user interface framework allowing interactive visualizations at multiple scales. The data in ePlant are displayed based on a hierarchical scale, combining many tools to provide useful information (Waese et al., 2017). One of the tools available in ePlant is the Tissue and Experiment eFP Viewer ( Figure 7 ), showing gene expression details on a gene-by-gene basis across the different samples in the experiment described in this paper. Here we display the visualization of the expression pattern of SWEET13 (Sh08\_g006050), providing similar results as the expression profiles shown in Figure 2B .

## DISCUSSION

In this study we analyzed immature culms of four sugarcane genotypes contrasting in their soluble solids content, at four time points during the growing season ranging from 6- to 12-monthold plants. Our goal was to study gene expression changes in apical culms related to carbon partitioning, aiming to understand differences between genotypes contrasting in their sugar content. The genotypes selected for this study were SP80-3280, R570, F36-819, and IN84-58, which vary regarding the soluble solids content ( Supplementary Table 1 ). We carried out investigations during the dry season in the Center-South region of Brazil, when sugarcane normally accumulates most of its sucrose (Jadoski and Ono, 2011). We initially tested for differential gene expression considering the main effects of the genotype factor, using the very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix genotype IN84-58 as a reference. We found many DEGs in common for the three genotypes with higher GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix levels F36-819, R570 and SP80-3280. This observation can be partially explained by breeding efforts focusing on sugar accumulation, because IN84-58 is a wild representative of the S. spontaneum species with higher lignin content, while all others are hybrids that have undergone selection at varying intensities. Basal metabolism, transposition and defense response were enriched among DEGs from the contrasts between groups. TEs are related to a range of mutations, mainly to substitutions, insertions and deletions of nucleotides (Kidwell, 2002). In sugarcane, TEs are widely distributed in hybrids and can introduce mutations in other coding genes, potentially resulting in greater allelic diversity

1 http://bar.utoronto.ca/eplant\_sugarcane/

(Lee and Kim, 2014). Also, TEs can be related to genome rearrangements caused by recent polyploidy (Premachandran et al., 2011). Similarly, TEs have been reported to be active under conditions such as pathogen attacks, physical injuries or abiotic stress (Grandbastien, 1998). Cell expansion occurs by the accumulation of sugar, iron or other types of solutes, creating an osmotic potential that allows water to enter into the cell, resulting in an irreversible expansion (Wang and Ruan, 2013). As a consequence, plants can trigger defense and stress response to protect from osmotic regulation (Couée et al., 2006).

To account for changes in gene expression across time points, we conducted pairwise tests for each genotype and time point combination, using as reference the expression level of VLB in 6-month-old plants. Despite the varying soluble solids content in the genotypes used in this work, the total number of DEGs was similar in all comparisons. Interestingly, differences were more marked in plants with 12 months of age (T4), probably because the hybrids were more mature than the S. spontaneum at this point in time.

We assessed in more detail the expression profiles of genes annotated with categories related to sucrose metabolism, cell wall biosynthesis, hormone metabolism and stress responses. Sugar accumulation is one of the best-studied processes in sugarcane, with genes reported to show up or downregulation depending on the collected material and maturation stage (Papini-Terzi et al., 2009; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017). Sucrose accumulation is related both to sugarcane maturation stage and internode position in the culm (Botha and Black, 2000). The sucrose produced in the leaves is transported to the culms and can be hydrolyzed by three invertases: cell-wall invertases, neutral invertases (located in the cytoplasm) and soluble acid invertases (located in the tonoplast). Invertases are key enzymes responsible for breaking sucrose into hexoses for translocation into the cell/vacuole (Ansari et al., 2013). In sugarcane, acid invertases cleave sucrose into fructose and glucose, which are subsequently translocated into the cell by transporters. Then, these monosaccharides can be used as osmotic regulators for cell expansion and growth processes (Zhu et al., 1997). In our work, cell wall invertase and soluble acid invertases showed downregulation in T1 for the three hybrids. Given that the VLB group is represented by a S. spontaneum accession, which accumulates more fiber than the hybrids, this suggests that differential cleavage of sucrose for deposition of cell wall components occurs in apical culms. SAIs have been previously inversely related to sugar accumulation, besides the activity of SAI decrease during the developmental stages (Verma et al., 2011a).

Another essential process for sucrose accumulation is sucrose translocation, which can occur via the apoplast or symplast. One type of symplastic transporter protein is called bidirectional sugar transporter, or SWEET (Sugars Will Eventually be Exported Transporter). SWEET13a, SWEET13b, and SWEET16a are possibly associated with sugar content in species of the genus Saccharum (Hu et al., 2018). Our results indicate that the gene encoding SWEET13 showed increased expression levels at 12 months, suggesting an increase in the transport of photosynthates in the late stages of sugarcane development. SWEET13 was also present among the most highly connected genes in the T2

FIGURE 7 | The Tissue and Experiment eFP Viewer of SWEET13 (Sh08\_g006050) available in the Sugarcane ePlant. The red and yellow colors denote high and low levels of expression, respectively.

<!-- image -->

and T4 co-expression networks, curiously with contrasting gene profiles (downregulation in T2 and increased expression level in T4). These results may reflect an intensification of vegetative growth in apical culms, because of changes in the environmental conditions ( Supplementary Figure 9 ).

Sucrose is one of the factors that contribute to plant development controlled by source-sink relations, regulating carbon translocation through the phloem and subsequent fixation in different plant organs (Lemoine et al., 2013). Sucrose accumulation is mainly correlated with the activity of SPS, followed by a sequential action of SPP (Botha and Black, 2000). The DEGs coding for SPS B showed increased expression until the last sampled time point, when its expression returned to the basal level for HB and LB or was down-regulated in the case of VLB. The genes encoding SPP (PrSPP3 and SPP2) showed a similar profile between comparisons, with higher expression in VLB in the initial time points. In the literature, SPS has been reported to be upregulated in mature sugarcane culms (Verma et al., 2011b; Wang et al., 2019). Our results revealed downregulation in the expression of SPP in apical culms at almost all time points. This result is in agreement with Partida et al. (2021), who reported downregulation of SPP 2D over the period of three to 12 months in source tissues of sugarcane. In any case, we did observe differences in temporal expression, which likely can be associated with the maturation of the genotypes in T4.

In plants, sucrose is converted to UDP-glucose (UDPG) regulated by the activity of SuSy, which causes a reversible cleavage of sucrose in sink tissues (Verma et al., 2011b). Also, sucrose storage in developing culms coincides with the reduction of hexoses (Whittaker and Botha, 1997). SuSy leads to the formation of UDPG and other nucleotide sugars, which can be used to synthesize cell wall components (Sung et al., 1989). In sugarcane, SuSy cleaves sucrose into UDPG for the formation of cell wall material and starch (Lingle and Smith, 1991). In addition, SuSy is associated with internode elongation (Lingle and Smith, 1991) and may be related to sucrose synthesis in immature internodes (Goldner et al., 1991). SuSy1 and SuSy3 showed higher expression in VLB in 6-month-old plants (T1), but after eight months (T2) SuSy1 was more expressed in the hybrids. These hybrids did not show differential expression of SuSy6, while the S. spontaneum genotype showed reduced expression over time. A previous study showed a decrease in the activity of SuSy in immature culms and mature culms of different genotypes with low and high sugar levels across time, however, with less intensity in high sugar levels (Verma et al., 2011b). This observation is probably because younger culms require more hexose sugars for cell wall formation and growth processes, with demand decreasing during maturation.

Cell wall biosynthesis can be negatively correlated with sucrose accumulation, by changing the carbon partitioning toward cell wall expansion (Casu et al., 2015). Cellulose is a major component of plant biomass and is responsible for giving rigidity to the cell wall, providing the backbone to determine cell shape and maintaining the resistance of turgor pressure (Gu and Somerville, 2010). Cellulose biosynthesis in different species depends on specific members of the CesA family. In A. thaliana CesA4, 7 and 8 are related to the deposition of the secondary cell wall (Taylor et al., 2003; Hernández-Blanco et al., 2007), while CesA10 and CesA12 are responsible for the same process in Zea mays (Appenzeller et al., 2004) and CesA7

and CesA8 in Oryza sativa . Besides that, CesA3 is related to primary cell wall biosynthesis in maize (Appenzeller et al., 2004). CesA10 and CesA12 showed lower expression in LB, HB and VHB groups in T1. For HB the expression was upregulated in T3, while for VLB, LB and VHB it was upregulated in T4. The expression levels of CesA4 and CesA7 increased over time for the LB, HB and VHB groups, and decreased for VLB. CesA8 showed variable profiles between soluble solids groups. The downregulation of CesA4 and CesA7 in VLB across time points was in accordance with the results obtained in immature culms of high fiber sugarcane genotypes (Kasirajan et al., 2018). Besides that, Casu et al. (2015) found upregulation of CesA10, 11, 12 in the rind, in comparison to vascular parenchyma and vascular bundles of mature sugarcane internodes. Primary and secondary cell wall biosynthesis is a dynamic process and is active in immature and mature culms of sugarcane (Casu et al., 2007). In our case, CesA10 and CesA12 were upregulated in T1 of VLB, probably because VLB represents a wild and more fibrous accession. In addition, CesA7 and CesA8 were, respectively, up and downregulated in T3 (ten months), showing high correlation in the co-expression network for this time point, with high connection to cell wall metabolism. This observation suggests a time shift in carbon partitioning in the apical culms.

Lignin is an organic polymer that is one of the secondary cell wall components, being essential for the cell wall backbone and rigidity (Chabannes et al., 2001). The final reduction of alcohols in the monolignols/lignin biosynthesis pathway is catalyzed by CAD (Sibout et al., 2005). This process can be regulated depending on the maturation phase (Sauter and Kende, 1992) or by abiotic/biotic stress in monocots (Mitchell et al., 1994). In O. sativa CAD1-9 are related to monolignols/lignin biosynthesis (Tobias and Chow, 2005), and CAD members C and D are related to lignin biosynthesis to sustain the floral stem development in A. thaliana (Sibout et al., 2005). We noticed the increased expression level of genes coding probable CAD1 and probable CAD6 in the VLB group. These results agree with higher lignification of the immature tissues during the early developmental stages of the high fiber genotype IN84-58. Conversely, Vicentini et al. (2015) reported low expression levels of CAD6 in mature sugarcane culms of two genotypes contrasting in lignin content.

Plant hormones are crucial for plant development and signaling networks, as well as responses to stresses (Bari and Jones, 2009). Auxin is a key hormone for plant growth regulating tropisms, apical dominance, root development, cell expansion, division and differentiation (Hagen and Guilfoyle, 2002). ARFs are exclusive to plants and correspond to a family of TFs that control the expression of auxin response genes (Guilfoyle and Hagen, 2007). ARFs are also related to plant development and stress tolerance (Van Ha et al., 2013). In our results, one ARF23like and ARF75 coding genes showed differences between groups with varying contents of soluble solids, with increased expression in LB, HB and VHB. The phytohormone ethylene is related to many developmental and growth processes and stress signaling. The corresponding synthetic hormone (ethephon) is reported to be related to sucrose accumulation in immature sugarcane stems by affecting internode elongation (Cunha et al., 2017).

EIN2 plays a central part in controling the ethylene signaling pathway in A. thaliana (Ju and Chang, 2015). In our work, EIN2-like and TS6 showed increased expression levels in the hybrids, when compared to the wild S. spontaneum accession. Mutations in TS6 in maize are related to sex determination and inflorescence branching, and this gene is associated with delays in the development of the inflorescence meristem (Irish, 1997). In our experiment ARF23-like, ARF75, EIN2-like and TS6 were upregulated in LB, HB and VHB, which are hybrids from sugarcane breeding programs. This suggests that S. officinarum may have contributed to the recalcitrance of flowering in the 'nobilization' process when compared to S. spontaneum (Kaffka and Grantz, 2014).

The concept of physiological stress is related to how the plant responds to many environmental conditions that limit growth, development, reproduction and crop productivity (Moore and Botha, 2014). bZIP TFs control processes related to pathogen attack (Droge-Laser et al., 1997), light and stress signaling (Choi et al., 2000), seed maturation and flowering development (Xiang et al., 1997). In rice, bZIP ABI5 and TRAB1 are regulated by ABA. Zou et al. (2008) described that overexpression of ABI5 resulted in plants with increased sensibility to salt stress, while repression lead to plants with higher tolerance but with abnormal pollen development, TRAB1 is described to control maturation and dormancy in embryos (Hobo et al., 1999). Also, bZIP RISBZ3 is expressed in the late stages of maturing seeds in rice (Onodera et al., 2001). In our results, the bZIP TFs ABI5 and TRAB1 showed downregulation, whereas RISBZ3 showed increased expression level at the initial time points for the LB, HB and VHB groups. This suggests a possible role in controlling the abiotic stress caused by the development of young tissues, as well as in the early control of maturation in young sugarcane culms (Moore and Cosgrove, 1991). This role is possibly shared with P450, FAR1, WRKY and MYB, TFs found in the temporal coexpression networks. All these TFs are mainly related to growth and development or stress responses, suggesting a sugarcane response to stress during the cell expansion process, as also reported by Carson and Botha (2002).

Transposons and retrotransposons are classes of transposable elements responsible for genome maintenance and diversification in sugarcane (Premachandran et al., 2011). Genes annotated as probable transposons and retrotransposons were mostly upregulated in all hybrids. Sugarcane hybrids represent a complex polyploid system formed by homoeologous chromosomes of S. officinarum and S. spontaneum . This possibly triggers genomic stress in these plants, where many transposable elements are activated in response to the combination of chromosomes of different species (Premachandran et al., 2011).

The accumulation of sucrose in the culms of sugarcane is controlled by a complex network of genes involved in the hydrolysis, re-synthesis and transport of sucrose, cell wall biosynthesis and abiotic stress responses. Here we found that invertases, SWEET13, SuSy1, SuSy3, probable CAD1 and CAD6 are likely related to early processes associated with carbon partitioning in apical culms. Moreover, we found evidence of particular TFs as important switches in processes related to sugarcane growth and development in early stages of maturation,

as well as a probable time shift for carbon partitioning at ten months. Additionally, the TFs ARF23-like, ARF25, EIN2-like and TS6 were upregulated only in hybrids, a possible reflection of selection in sugarcane breeding programs. Although multiple studies have been developed in sugarcane, there are still many gaps in completely understanding how it accumulates sucrose in its culms. In this regard, our work provides useful gene expression profiles in apical culms of different genotypes, which can be used as genetic biomarkers for further studies.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ ena, PRJEB40481.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

GM, MC, and AS conceived and designed the experiments. MC provided the sugarcane biological material. GM, GH, FC, FB, and TB performed the experiments and data collection. GH, FC,

## REFERENCES

- Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W., and Lipman, D. J. (1990). Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403-410. doi: 10.1016/S00222836(05)80360-2
- Ansari, M. I., Yadav, A., and Lal, R. (2013). An-Overview on invertase in sugarcane. Bioinformation 9, 464-465. doi: 10.6026/97320630009464
- Appenzeller, L., Doblin, M., Barreiro, R., Wang, H., Niu, X., Kollipara, K., et al. (2004). Cellulose synthesis in maize: isolation and expression analysis of the cellulose synthase (CesA) gene family. Cellulose 11, 287-299. doi: 10.1023/B: CELL.0000046417.84715.27
- Bao, Y., Song, W. M., Pan, J., Jiang, C. M., Srivastava, R., Li, B., et al. (2016). Overexpression of the NDR1/HIN1-Like gene NHL6 modifies seed germination in response to abscisic acid and abiotic stresses in arabidopsis. PLoS One 11:e0148572. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148572
- Bari, R., and Jones, J. D. G. (2009). Role of plant hormones in plant defence responses. Plant Mol. Biol. 69, 473-488. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9435-0
- Barreto, F. Z., Bachega Feijó Rosa, J. R., Almeida Balsalobre, T. W., Pastina, M. M., Silva, R. R., Hoffmann, H. P., et al. (2019). A genome-wide association study identified loci for yield component traits in sugarcane ( Saccharum spp.). PLoS One 14:e0219843. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219843
- Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B 57, 289-300. doi: 10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x
- Berardini, T. Z., Bollman, K., Sun, H., and Scott Poethig, R. (2001). Regulation of vegetative phase change in arabidopsis thaliana by cyclophilin 40. Science 291, 2405-2407. doi: 10.1126/science.1057144
- Bindon, K. A., and Botha, F. C. (2002). Carbon allocation to the insoluble fraction, respiration and triose-phosphate cycling in the sugarcane culm. Physiol. Plant. 116, 12-19. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-3054.2002.1160102.x
- Botha, F. C., and Black, K. G. (2000). Sucrose phosphate synthase and sucrose synthase activity during maturation of internodal tissue in sugarcane. Aust. J. Plant Physiol. 27, 81-85. doi: 10.1071/pp99098
- Bull, T., and Glasziou, K. (1963). The evolutionary significance of sugar accumulation in saccharum. Aust. J. Biol. Sci. 16, 737-742. doi: 10.1071/ BI9630737
- Campos, H., and Caligari, P. D. S. (2017). Genetic Improvement Of Tropical Crops . Cham: Springer International Publishing, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-59819-2

CS, and DS analyzed the data. GH, AP, and NP designed the Sugarcane ePlant. GH wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript and read and approved the final manuscript.

## FUNDING

This research was supported by grant #2015/22993-7, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP), awarded to GM. This study was also financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) Finance Code 001. GH received a fellowship from the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES -Biologia Computacional -88882.160212/201701/PrInt - 88887.371113/2019-00).

## SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2021. 736797/full#supplementary-material

- Carson, D., and Botha, F. (2002). Genes expressed in sugarcane maturing internodal tissue. Plant Cell Rep. 20, 1075-1081. doi: 10.1007/s00299-002-0 444-1
- Casu, R. E., Jarmey, J. M., Bonnett, G. D., and Manners, J. M. (2007). Identification of transcripts associated with cell wall metabolism and development in the stem of sugarcane by Affymetrix GeneChip Sugarcane Genome Array expression profiling. Funct. Integr. Genomics 7, 153-167. doi: 10.1007/s10142-006-0 038-z
- Casu, R. E., Rae, A. L., Nielsen, J. M., Perroux, J. M., Bonnett, G. D., and Manners, J. M. (2015). Tissue-specific transcriptome analysis within the maturing sugarcane stalk reveals spatial regulation in the expression of cellulose synthase and sucrose transporter gene families. Plant Mol. Biol. 89, 607-628. doi: 10.1007/s11103-015-0388-9
- Chabannes, M., Ruel, K., Yoshinaga, A., Chabbert, B., Jauneau, A., Joseleau, J. P., et al. (2001). In situ analysis of lignins in transgenic tobacco reveals a differential impact of individual transformations on the spatial patterns of lignin deposition at the cellular and subcellular levels. Plant J. 28, 271-282. doi: 10.1046/j.1365313X.2001.01159.x
- Chin, C. H., Chen, S. H., Wu, H. H., Ho, C. W., Ko, M. T., and Lin, C. Y. (2014). cytohubba: Identifying hub objects and sub-networks from complex interactome. BMC Syst. Biol. 8 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):S11. doi: 10.1186/1752-05098-S4-S11
- Choi, H., Hong, J., Ha, J., Kang, J., and Kim, S. Y. (2000). ABFs, a family of ABA-responsive element binding factors. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 1723-1730.
- Conesa, A., Götz, S., García-Gómez, J. M., Terol, J., Talón, M., and Robles, M. (2005). Blast2GO: a universal tool for annotation, visualization and analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21, 3674-3676. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/bti610
- Correr, F. H., Hosaka, G. K., Barreto, F. Z., Valadaõ, I. B., Balsalobre, T. W. A., Furtado, A., et al. (2020a). Differential expression in leaves of Saccharum genotypes contrasting in biomass production provides evidence of genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC Genomics 21:673. doi: 10.1186/s12864020-07091-y
- Correr, F. H., Hosaka, G. K., Gómez, S. G. P., Cia, M. C., Vitorello, C. B. M., Camargo, L. E. A., et al. (2020b). Time-series expression profiling of sugarcane leaves infected with Puccinia kuehnii reveals an ineffective defense system leading to susceptibility. Plant Cell Rep. 39, 873-889. doi: 10.1007/s00299-02002536-w

- Couée, I., Sulmon, C., Gouesbet, G., and El Amrani, A. (2006). Involvement of soluble sugars in reactive oxygen species balance and responses to oxidative stress in plants. J. Exp. Bot. 57, 449-459. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erj027
- Cunha, C. P., Roberto, G. G., Vicentini, R., Lembke, C. G., Souza, G. M., Ribeiro, R. V., et al. (2017). Ethylene-induced transcriptional and hormonal responses at the onset of sugarcane ripening. Sci. Rep. 7, 1-18. doi: 10.1038/srep43364
- D'Hont, A. (2005). Unraveling the genome structure of polyploids using FISH and GISH; examples of sugarcane and banana. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 109, 27-33. doi: 10.1159/000082378
- Delatte, T. L., Sedijani, P., Kondou, Y., Matsui, M., de Jong, G. J., Somsen, G. W., et al. (2011). Growth arrest by trehalose-6-phosphate: an astonishing case of primary metabolite control over growth by way of the SnRK1 signaling pathway. Plant Physiol. 157, 160-174. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.180422
- Devaiah, B. N., and Raghothama, K. G. (2007). Transcriptional regulation of Pi starvation responses by WRKY75. Plant Signal. Behav. 2, 424-425. doi: 10.4161/ psb.2.5.4418
- Droge-Laser, W., Kaiser, A., Lindsay, W. P., Halkier, B. A., Loake, G. J., Doerner, P., et al. (1997). Rapid stimulation of a soybean protein-serine kinase that phosphorylates a novel bZIP DNA-binding protein, G/HBF-1, during the induction of early transcription-dependent defenses. EMBO J. 16, 726-738. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.4.726
- Eastmond, P. J., Van Dijken, A. J. H., Spielman, M., Kerr, A., Tissier, A. F., Dickinson, H. G., et al. (2002). Trehalose-6-phosphate synthase 1, which catalyses the first step in trehalose synthesis, is essential for Arabidopsis embryo maturation. Plant J. 29, 225-235. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2002.01220.x
- Flugge, M., Lewandrowski, J., Rosenfeld, J., Boland, C., and Hendrickson, T. (2017). A Life-Cycle Analysis of the Greenhouse gas emissions of corn-based ethanol. Ind. Biotechnol. 13, 19-22. doi: 10.1089/ind.2017.29071.usda
- Food and Agriculture Organization (2021). Faostat. Faostat . Available online at: http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QC/visualize [Accessed January 18, 2020]
- Garg, A. K., Kim, J. K., Owens, T. G., Ranwala, A. P., Do Choi, Y., Kochian, L. V., et al. (2002). Trehalose accumulation in rice plants confers high tolerance levels to different abiotic stresses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 15898-15903. doi: 10.1073/pnas.252637799
- Garsmeur, O., Droc, G., Antonise, R., Grimwood, J., Potier, B., Aitken, K., et al. (2018). A mosaic monoploid reference sequence for the highly complex genome of sugarcane. Nat. Commun. 9:2638. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-05051-5
- Goldner, W., Thom, M., and Maretzki, A. (1991). Sucrose metabolism in sugarcane cell suspension cultures. Plant Sci. 73, 143-147. doi: 10.1016/0168-9452(91) 90021-Y
- Gong, X., Su, Q., Lin, D., Jiang, Q., Xu, J., Zhang, J., et al. (2014). The rice OsV4 encoding a novel pentatricopeptide repeat protein is required for chloroplast development during the early leaf stage under cold stress. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 56, 400-410. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12138
- Goodstein, D. M., Shu, S., Howson, R., Neupane, R., Hayes, R. D., Fazo, J., et al. (2012). Phytozome: a comparative platform for green plant genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D1178-D1186. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr944
- Grabherr, M. G., Haas, B. J., Yassour, M., Levin, J. Z., Thompson, D. A., Amit, I., et al. (2011). Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 644-652. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1883
- Grandbastien, M. A. (1998). Activation of plant retrotransposons under stress conditions. Trends Plant Sci. 3, 181-187. doi: 10.1016/S1360-1385(98)01 232-1
- Gu, Y., and Somerville, C. (2010). Cellulose synthase interacting protein: a new factor in cellulose synthesis. Plant Signal. Behav. 5, 1571-1574. doi: 10.4161/ psb.5.12.13621
- Guilfoyle, T. J., and Hagen, G. (2001). Auxin response factors. J. Plant Growth Regul. 20, 281-291. doi: 10.1007/s003440010026
- Guilfoyle, T. J., and Hagen, G. (2007). Auxin response factors. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 10, 453-460. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2007.08.014
- Hagen, G., and Guilfoyle, T. (2002). Auxin-responsive gene expression: genes, promoters and regulatory factors. Plant Mol. Biol. 49, 373-385. doi: 10.1023/A: 1015207114117
- Hernández-Blanco, C., Feng, D. X., Hu, J., Sánchez-Vallet, A., Deslandes, L., Llorente, F., et al. (2007). Impairment of cellulose synthases required for Arabidopsis secondary cell wall formation enhances disease resistance. Plant Cell 19, 890-903. doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.048058
- Hichri, I., Barrieu, F., Bogs, J., Kappel, C., Delrot, S., and Lauvergeat, V. (2011). Recent advances in the transcriptional regulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. J. Exp. Bot. 62, 2465-2483. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq442
- Hobo, T., Kowyama, Y., and Hattori, T. (1999). A bZIP factor, TRAB1, interacts with VP1 and mediates abscisic acid- induced transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 15348-15353. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.26.15348
- Hu, W., Hua, X., Zhang, Q., Wang, J., Shen, Q., Zhang, X., et al. (2018). New insights into the evolution and functional divergence of the SWEET family in Saccharum based on comparative genomics. BMC Plant Biol. 18:270. doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1495-y
- Irish, E. E. (1997). Experimental analysis of tassel development in the maize mutant tassel seed 6. Plant Physiol. 114, 817-825. doi: 10.1104/pp.114.3.817
- Jadoski, C. J., and Ono, E. O. (2011). Physiology aspects of sugarcane production. Appl. Res. Agrotechnol. 3, 223-230. doi: 10.5777/paet.v3i3.1065
- Jin, J., Tian, F., Y ang, D., Meng, Y., Kong, L., Luo, J., et al. (2017). PlantTFDB 4 . 0: toward a central hub for transcription factors and regulatory interactions in plants. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 1040-1045. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw982
- Ju, C., and Chang, C. (2015). Mechanistic insights in ethylene perception and signal transduction. Plant Physiol. 169, 85-95. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.00845
- Jun, S. H., Han, M. J., Lee, S., Seo, Y. S., Kim, W. T., and An, G. (2004). OsEIN2 is a positive component in ethylene signaling in rice. Plant Cell Physiol . 45, 281-289. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pch033
- Jung, C., Jun, S. S., Sang, W. H., Yeon, J. K., Chung, H. K., Sang, I. S., et al. (2008). Overexpression of AtMYB44 enhances stomatal closure to confer abiotic stress tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol. 146, 623-635. doi: 10.1104/ pp.107.110981
- Kaffka, S. R., and Grantz, D. A. (2014). Sugar crops. Encycl. Agric. Food Syst. 5, 240-260. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52512-3.00150-9
- Kasirajan, L., Hoang, N. V., Furtado, A., Botha, F. C., and Henry, R. J. (2018). Transcriptome analysis highlights key differentially expressed genes involved in cellulose and lignin biosynthesis of sugarcane genotypes varying in fiber content. Sci. Rep. 8:11612. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30033-4
- Kidwell, M. G. (2002). Transposable Elements And The Evolution Of Genome Size In Eukaryotes . Available online at: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/ 10.1023%2FA%3A1016072014259.pdf [Accessed May 28, 2019].
- Kim, D., Langmead, B., and Salzberg, S. L. (2015). HISAT: A fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements. Nat. Methods 12, 357-360. doi: 10.1038/nmeth. 3317
- Langfelder, P., and Horvath, S. (2008). WGCNA: An R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9:559. doi: 10.1186/14712105-9-559
- Langfelder, P., Mischel, P. S., and Horvath, S. (2013). When is hub gene selection better than standard meta-analysis? PLoS One 8:e61505. doi: 10.1371/journal. pone.0061505
- Lee, S.-I., and Kim, N.-S. (2014). Transposable elements and genome size variations in plants. Genomics Inform. 12:87. doi: 10.5808/gi.2014.12.3.87
- Lemoine, R., La Camera, S., Atanassova, R., Dédaldéchamp, F., Allario, T., Pourtau, N., et al. (2013). Source-to-sink transport of sugar and regulation by environmental factors. Front. Plant Sci. 4:272. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00272
- Li, G., Siddiqui, H., Teng, Y., Lin, R., Wan, X. Y., Li, J., et al. (2011). Coordinated transcriptional regulation underlying the circadian clock in Arabidopsis . Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 616-622. doi: 10.1038/ncb2219
- Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K., and Shi, W. (2014). FeatureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30, 923-930. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656
- Lingle, S. E., and Smith, R. C. (1991). Sucrose metabolism related to growth and ripening in sugarcane internodes. Crop Sci. 31:172. doi: 10.2135/cropsci1991. 0011183x003100010039x
- Ma, L., Tian, T., Lin, R., Deng, X. W., Wang, H., and Li, G. (2016). Arabidopsis FHY3andFAR1regulate light-induced myo-inositol biosynthesis and oxidative stress responses by transcriptional activation of MIPS1. Mol. Plant 9, 541-557. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.12.013
- Mao, G., Seebeck, T., Schrenker, D., and Yu, O. (2013). CYP709B3, a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase gene involved in salt tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana . BMC Plant Biol. 13:169. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-169
- Mattiello, L., Riaño-Pachón, D. M., Martins, M. C. M., da Cruz, L. P., Bassi, D., Marchiori, P. E. R., et al. (2015). Physiological and transcriptional analyses

- of developmental stages along sugarcane leaf. BMC Plant Biol. 15:300. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0694-z
- Medeiros, C., Almeida Balsalobre, T. W., and Carneiro, M. S. (2020). Molecular diversity and genetic structure of Saccharum complex accessions. PLoS One 15:e0233211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233211
- Ming, R., Moore, P. H., Wu, K. K., D'Hont, A., Glaszmann, J. C., Tew, T. L., et al. (2010). Sugarcane improvement through breeding and biotechnology. Plant Breed. Rev. 27, 115-118. doi: 10.1002/9780470650349.ch2
- Mitchell, H. J., Hall, J. L., and Barber, M. S. (1994). Elicitor-induced cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase activity in lignifying wheat ( Triticum aestivum L.) Leaves. Plant Physiol. 104, 551-556. doi: 10.1104/pp.104.2.551
- Mockaitis, K., and Estelle, M. (2004). Integrating transcriptional controls for plant cell expansion. Genome Biol. 5:245. doi: 10.1186/gb-2004-5-11-245
- Moore, P. H., and Cosgrove, D. J. (1991). Developmental changes in cell and tissue water relations parameters in storage parenchyma of sugarcane. Plant Physiol. 96, 794-801. doi: 10.1104/pp.96.3.794
- Moore, P., and Botha, F. (2014). Sugarcane: Physiology, Biochemistry, and Functional Biology . Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Nishiyama, M. Y., Ferreira, S. S., Tang, P.-Z., Becker, S., Pörtner-Taliana, A., and Souza, G. M. (2014). Full-length enriched cDNA libraries and ORFeome analysis of sugarcane hybrid and ancestor genotypes. PLoS One 9:14. doi: 10. 1371/journal.pone.0107351
- Noda, K. I., Glover, B. J., Linstead, P., and Martin, C. (1994). Flower colour intensity depends on specialized cell shape controlled by a Myb-related transcription factor. Nature 369, 661-664. doi: 10.1038/369661a0
- Nover, L., Bharti, K., Do, P., Mishra, S. K., and Ganguli, A. (2001). Arabidopsis and the heat stress transcription factor world: how many heat stress transcription factors do we need? Cell Stress Chaperones 6, 177-189.
- Onodera, Y., Suzuki, A., Wu, C. Y., Washida, H., and Takaiwa, F. (2001). A rice functional transcriptional activator, RISBZ1, responsible for endospermspecific expression of storage protein genes through GCN4 motif. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 14139-14152. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007405200
- Papini-Terzi, F. S., Rocha, F. R., Vêncio, R. Z. N. N., Felix, J. M., Branco, D. S., Waclawovsky, A. J., et al. (2009). Sugarcane genes associated with sucrose content. BMC Genomics 10:120. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-120
- Partida, V. G. S., Dias, H. M., Corcino, D. S. M., and Van Sluys, M. A. (2021). Sucrose-phosphate phosphatase from sugarcane reveals an ancestral tandem duplication. BMC Plant Biol. 21:23. doi: 10.1186/s12870-020-02795-5
- Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M. I., Irizarry, R. A., and Kingsford, C. (2017). Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nat. Methods 14, 417-419. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4197
- Piperidis, N., D'Hont, A., and D'Hont, A. (2020). Sugarcane genome architecture decrypted with chromosome-specific oligo probes. Plant J. 103, 2039-2051. doi: 10.1111/tpj.14881
- Piperidis, N., and D'Hont, A. (2020). Sugarcane genome architecture decrypted with chromosome-specific oligo probes. Plant J. 103, 2039-2051.
- Premachandran, M. N., Prathima, P. T., and Lekshmi, M. (2011). Sugarcane and polyploidy - a review. J. Sugarcane Res. 1, 1-15.
- Rae, A. L., Grof, C. P. L., Casu, R. E., and Bonnett, G. D. (2005). Sucrose accumulation in the sugarcane stem: pathways and control points for transport and compartmentation. Field Crops Res. 92, 159-168. doi: 10.1016/j.fcr.2005.01. 027
- Ranocha, P., Denancé, N., Vanholme, R., Freydier, A., Martinez, Y., Hoffmann, L., et al. (2010). Walls are thin 1 (WAT1), an Arabidopsis homolog of Medicago truncatula NODULIN21, is a tonoplast-localized protein required for secondary wall formation in fibers. Plant J. 63, 469-483. doi: 10.1111/j.1365313X.2010.04256.x
- Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J., and Smyth, G. K. (2010). edgeR: a bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139-140. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/ btp616
- Sauter, M., and Kende, H. (1992). Levels of b -glucan and lignin in elongating internodes of deepwater rice. Plant Cell Physiol. 33, 1089-1097. doi: 10.1093/ oxfordjournals.pcp.a078360
- Schwacke, R., Ponce-Soto, G. Y., Krause, K., Bolger, A. M., Arsova, B., Hallab, A., et al. (2019). MapMan4: a refined protein classification and annotation framework applicable to multi-omics data analysis. Mol. Plant 12, 879-892. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2019.01.003
- Segarra, G., Van Der Ent, S., Trillas, I., and Pieterse, C. M. J. (2009). MYB72, a node of convergence in induced systemic resistance triggered by a fungal and a bacterial beneficial microbe. Plant Biol. 11, 90-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1438-8677. 2008.00162.x
- Shannon, P., Markiel, A., Ozier, O., Baliga, N. S., Wang, J. T., Ramage, D., et al. (2003). Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 13, 2498-2504. doi: 10.1101/ gr.1239303
- Sibout, R., Eudes, A., Mouille, G., Pollet, B., Lapierre, C., Jouanin, L., et al. (2005). Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase-C and -D are the primary genes involved in lignin biosynthesis in the floral stem of arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17, 2059-2076. doi: 10.1105/tpc.105.030767
- Simão, F. A., Waterhouse, R. M., Ioannidis, P., Kriventseva, E. V., and Zdobnov, E. M. (2015). BUSCO: assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 31, 3210-3212. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/btv351
- Slewinski, T. L. (2012). Non-structural carbohydrate partitioning in grass stems: a target to increase yield stability, stress tolerance, and biofuel production. J. Exp. Bot. 63, 4647-4670. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers124
- Soneson, C., Love, M. I., and Robinson, M. D. (2015). Differential analyses for RNA-seq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences. F1000Research 4:1521. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.7563.1
- Sung, S.-J. S., Xu, D.-P., and Black, C. C. (1989). Identification of Actively Filling Sucrose Sinks. Plant Physiol. 89, 1117-1121. doi: 10.1104/pp.89.4.1117
- Sung, T. Y., Tseng, C. C., and Hsieh, M. H. (2010). The SLO1 PPR protein is required for RNA editing at multiple sites with similar upstream sequences in Arabidopsis mitochondria . Plant J. 63, 499-511. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010. 04258.x
- Taylor, N. G., Howells, R. M., Huttly, A. K., Vickers, K., and Turner, S. R. (2003). Interactions among three distinct CesA proteins essential for cellulose synthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 1450-1455. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0337628100
- Thimm, O., Bläsing, O., Gibon, Y., Nagel, A., Meyer, S., Krüger, P., et al. (2004). MAPMAN: A user-driven tool to display genomics data sets onto diagrams of metabolic pathways and other biological processes. Plant J. 37, 914-939. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02016.x
- Thirugnanasambandam, P. P., Hoang, N. V., Furtado, A., Botha, F. C., and Henry, R. J. (2017). Association of variation in the sugarcane transcriptome with sugar content. BMC Genomics 18:909. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4302-5
- Tobias, C. M., and Chow, E. K. (2005). Structure of the cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase gene family in rice and promoter activity of a member associated with lignification. Planta 220, 678-688. doi: 10.1007/s00425-004-1385-4
- Tokunaga, N., Kaneta, T., Sato, S., and Sato, Y. (2009). Analysis of expression profiles of three peroxidase genes associated with lignification in Arabidopsis thaliana . Physiol. Plant. 136, 237-249. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2009.01 233.x
- Usadel, B., Obayashi, T., Mutwil, M., Giorgi, F. M., Bassel, G. W., Tanimoto, M., et al. (2009). Co-expression tools for plant biology: opportunities for hypothesis generation and caveats. Plant Cell Environ. 32, 1633-1651. doi: 10.1111/j.13653040.2009.02040.x
- Van Dijken, A. J. H., Schluepmann, H., and Smeekens, S. C. M. (2004). Arabidopsis trehalose-6-phosphate synthase 1 is essential for normal vegetative growth and transition to flowering. Plant Physiol. 135, 969-977. doi: 10.1104/pp.104. 039743
- Van Ha, C., Le, D. T., Nishiyama, R., Watanabe, Y., Sulieman, S., Tran, U. T., et al. (2013). The auxin response factor transcription factor family in soybean: genome-wide identification and expression analyses during development and water stress. DNA Res. 20, 511-524. doi: 10.1093/dnares/dst027
- Vatén, A., Dettmer, J., Wu, S., Stierhof, Y. D., Miyashima, S., Yadav, S. R., et al. (2011). Callose biosynthesis regulates symplastic trafficking during root development. Dev. Cell 21, 1144-1155. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.10.006
- Verma, A. K., Upadhyay, S. K., Verma, P. C., Solomon, S., and Singh, S. B. (2011b). Functional analysis of sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS) and sucrose synthase (SS) in sugarcane ( Saccharum ) cultivars. Plant Biol. 13, 325-332. doi: 10.1111/j. 1438-8677.2010.00379.x
- Verma, A. K., Upadhyay, S. K., Srivastava, M. K., Verma, P. C., Solomon, S., and Singh, S. B. (2011a). Transcript expression and soluble acid invertase activity during sucrose accumulation in sugarcane. Acta Physiol. Plant. 33, 1749-1757. doi: 10.1007/s11738-011-0711-2

- Vicentini, R., Bottcher, A., Dos Santos Brito, M., Dos Santos, A. B., Creste, S., De Andrade Landell, M. G., et al. (2015). Large-scale transcriptome analysis of two sugarcane genotypes contrasting for lignin content. PLoS One 10:e0134909. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134909
- Waclawovsky, A. J., Sato, P. M., Lembke, C. G., Moore, P. H., and Souza, G. M. (2010). Sugarcane for bioenergy production: an assessment of yield and regulation of sucrose content. Plant Biotechnol. J. 8, 263-276. doi: 10.1111/j. 1467-7652.2009.00491.x
- Waese, J., Fan, J., Pasha, A., Yu, H., Fucile, G., Shi, R., et al. (2017). ePlant: visualizing and exploring multiple levels of data for hypothesis generation in plant biology. Plant Cell 29, 1806-1821. doi: 10.1105/tpc.17.00073
- Wang, G., Long, Y., Thomma, B. P. H. J., de Wit, P. J. G. M., Angenent, G. C., and Fiers, M. (2010). Functional analyses of the Clavata2-like proteins and their domains that contribute to CLAVATA2 specificity. Plant Physiol. 152, 320-331. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.148197
- Wang, J. G., Zhao, T. T., Wang, W. Z., Feng, C. L., Feng, X. Y., Xiong, G. R., et al. (2019). Culm transcriptome sequencing of Badila ( Saccharum officinarum L.) and analysis of major genes involved in sucrose accumulation. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 144, 455-465. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2019.10.016
- Wang, L., and Ruan, Y.-L. (2013). Regulation of cell division and expansion by sugar and auxin signaling. Front. Plant Sci. 4:163. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00163
- Wang, W., Tang, W., Ma, T., Niu, D., Jin, J. B., Wang, H., et al. (2016). A pair of light signaling factors FHY3 and FAR1 regulates plant immunity by modulating chlorophyll biosynthesis. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 58, 91-103. doi: 10.1111/jipb. 12369
- Whittaker, A., and Botha, F. C. (1997). Carbon partitioning during sucrose accumulation in sugarcane internodal tissue. Plant Physiol. 115, 1651-1659. doi: 10.1104/pp.115.4.1651
- Xiang, C., Miao, Z., and Lam, E. (1997). DNA-binding properties, genomic organization and expression pattern of TGA6, a new member of the TGA family of bZIP transcription factors in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Mol. Biol. 34, 403-415. doi: 10.1023/A:1005873500238
- Yilmaz, A., Nishiyama, M. Y., Fuentes, B. G., Souza, G. M., Janies, D., Gray, J., et al. (2009). GRASSIUS: A platform for comparative regulatory genomics across the grasses. Plant Physiol. 149, 171-180. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.128579
- Young, M. D., Wakefield, M. J., Smyth, G. K., and Oshlack, A. (2010). Gene ontology analysis for RNA-seq: accounting for selection bias. Genome Biol. 11:R14. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-2-r14
- Yuan, Y., Xu, X., Gong, Z., Tang, Y., Wu, M. Yan, F., et al. (2019). Auxin response factor 6A regulates photosynthesis, sugar accumulation, and fruit development in tomato. Hortic. Res. 6:85. doi: 10.1038/s41438-019-0167-x
- Zhang, J., Zhang, X., Tang, H., Zhang, Q., Hua, X., Ma, X., et al. (2018). Alleledefined genome of the autopolyploid sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Nat. Genet. 50, 1565-1573. doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0237-2
- Zhu, Y. J., Komor, E., and Moore, P. H. (1997). Sucrose accumulation in the sugarcane stem is regulated by the difference between the activities of soluble acid invertase and sucrose phosphate synthase. Plant Physiol. 115, 609-616. doi: 10.1104/pp.115.2.609
- Zou, M., Guan, Y., Ren, H., Zhang, F., and Chen, F. (2008). A bZIP transcription factor, OsABI5, is involved in rice fertility and stress tolerance. Plant Mol. Biol. 66, 675-683. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9 298-4

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher's Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Copyright © 2021 Hosaka, Correr, da Silva, Sforça, Barreto, Balsalobre, Pasha, de Souza, Provart, Carneiro and Margarido. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
MATERIALS
## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Plant Material

We initially chose four genotypes representing different levels of soluble solids ( GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix) in a panel of Saccharum genotypes ( Supplementary Table 1 ). The soluble solids content was used as a proxy for sugar content, to classify each genotype as having very high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (VHB), high GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (HB), low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (LB) or very low GLYPH&lt;14&gt; Brix (VLB). We also considered the relevance of genotypes to previous genomic studies. Hybrids SP80-3280 and R570 have been widely used in genomic studies and IN84-58 is a commonly used representative of S. spontaneum (Partida et al., 2021). Genotype F36-819 is an important ancestor in Brazilian breeding programs, found in the pedigree of RB867515 (Barreto et al., 2019), currently one of the most grown cultivars. These genotypes are present in the Brazilian Panel of Sugarcane Genotypes (BPSG) (Barreto et al., 2019; Medeiros et al., 2020), which currently contains 254 genotypes, including representatives of wild Saccharum species, relevant cultivars for breeding programs and cultivars from other sugarcane producing countries. The plants in the field were grown in a randomized block design with four replicates, at the Federal University of São Carlos/Araras (22 GLYPH&lt;14&gt; 18 0 41.0 00 S, 47 GLYPH&lt;14&gt; 23 0 05.0 00 W, at an altitude of 611m) - São Paulo - Brazil.

We collected immature culms from the C 1 internode of three replicates of each genotype ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). We sampled plants at four evenly distributed time points: April (T1), June (T2), August (T3) and October (T4) of 2016, corresponding to 6-, 8-, 10-, and 12-month-old first ratoon plants. Hence, our experiment corresponded to a 4 GLYPH&lt;2&gt; 4 factorial design, with a total of 48 samples, which allowed the investigation of genotype by time point interaction. Tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 GLYPH&lt;14&gt; C until further processing.

## SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2021. 736797/full#supplementary-material

- Carson, D., and Botha, F. (2002). Genes expressed in sugarcane maturing internodal tissue. Plant Cell Rep. 20, 1075-1081. doi: 10.1007/s00299-002-0 444-1
- Casu, R. E., Jarmey, J. M., Bonnett, G. D., and Manners, J. M. (2007). Identification of transcripts associated with cell wall metabolism and development in the stem of sugarcane by Affymetrix GeneChip Sugarcane Genome Array expression profiling. Funct. Integr. Genomics 7, 153-167. doi: 10.1007/s10142-006-0 038-z
- Casu, R. E., Rae, A. L., Nielsen, J. M., Perroux, J. M., Bonnett, G. D., and Manners, J. M. (2015). Tissue-specific transcriptome analysis within the maturing sugarcane stalk reveals spatial regulation in the expression of cellulose synthase and sucrose transporter gene families. Plant Mol. Biol. 89, 607-628. doi: 10.1007/s11103-015-0388-9
- Chabannes, M., Ruel, K., Yoshinaga, A., Chabbert, B., Jauneau, A., Joseleau, J. P., et al. (2001). In situ analysis of lignins in transgenic tobacco reveals a differential impact of individual transformations on the spatial patterns of lignin deposition at the cellular and subcellular levels. Plant J. 28, 271-282. doi: 10.1046/j.1365313X.2001.01159.x
- Chin, C. H., Chen, S. H., Wu, H. H., Ho, C. W., Ko, M. T., and Lin, C. Y. (2014). cytohubba: Identifying hub objects and sub-networks from complex interactome. BMC Syst. Biol. 8 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):S11. doi: 10.1186/1752-05098-S4-S11
- Choi, H., Hong, J., Ha, J., Kang, J., and Kim, S. Y. (2000). ABFs, a family of ABA-responsive element binding factors. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 1723-1730.
- Conesa, A., Götz, S., García-Gómez, J. M., Terol, J., Talón, M., and Robles, M. (2005). Blast2GO: a universal tool for annotation, visualization and analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21, 3674-3676. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/bti610
- Correr, F. H., Hosaka, G. K., Barreto, F. Z., Valadaõ, I. B., Balsalobre, T. W. A., Furtado, A., et al. (2020a). Differential expression in leaves of Saccharum genotypes contrasting in biomass production provides evidence of genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC Genomics 21:673. doi: 10.1186/s12864020-07091-y
- Correr, F. H., Hosaka, G. K., Gómez, S. G. P., Cia, M. C., Vitorello, C. B. M., Camargo, L. E. A., et al. (2020b). Time-series expression profiling of sugarcane leaves infected with Puccinia kuehnii reveals an ineffective defense system leading to susceptibility. Plant Cell Rep. 39, 873-889. doi: 10.1007/s00299-02002536-w

- Couée, I., Sulmon, C., Gouesbet, G., and El Amrani, A. (2006). Involvement of soluble sugars in reactive oxygen species balance and responses to oxidative stress in plants. J. Exp. Bot. 57, 449-459. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erj027
- Cunha, C. P., Roberto, G. G., Vicentini, R., Lembke, C. G., Souza, G. M., Ribeiro, R. V., et al. (2017). Ethylene-induced transcriptional and hormonal responses at the onset of sugarcane ripening. Sci. Rep. 7, 1-18. doi: 10.1038/srep43364
- D'Hont, A. (2005). Unraveling the genome structure of polyploids using FISH and GISH; examples of sugarcane and banana. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 109, 27-33. doi: 10.1159/000082378
- Delatte, T. L., Sedijani, P., Kondou, Y., Matsui, M., de Jong, G. J., Somsen, G. W., et al. (2011). Growth arrest by trehalose-6-phosphate: an astonishing case of primary metabolite control over growth by way of the SnRK1 signaling pathway. Plant Physiol. 157, 160-174. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.180422
- Devaiah, B. N., and Raghothama, K. G. (2007). Transcriptional regulation of Pi starvation responses by WRKY75. Plant Signal. Behav. 2, 424-425. doi: 10.4161/ psb.2.5.4418
- Droge-Laser, W., Kaiser, A., Lindsay, W. P., Halkier, B. A., Loake, G. J., Doerner, P., et al. (1997). Rapid stimulation of a soybean protein-serine kinase that phosphorylates a novel bZIP DNA-binding protein, G/HBF-1, during the induction of early transcription-dependent defenses. EMBO J. 16, 726-738. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.4.726
- Eastmond, P. J., Van Dijken, A. J. H., Spielman, M., Kerr, A., Tissier, A. F., Dickinson, H. G., et al. (2002). Trehalose-6-phosphate synthase 1, which catalyses the first step in trehalose synthesis, is essential for Arabidopsis embryo maturation. Plant J. 29, 225-235. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2002.01220.x
- Flugge, M., Lewandrowski, J., Rosenfeld, J., Boland, C., and Hendrickson, T. (2017). A Life-Cycle Analysis of the Greenhouse gas emissions of corn-based ethanol. Ind. Biotechnol. 13, 19-22. doi: 10.1089/ind.2017.29071.usda
- Food and Agriculture Organization (2021). Faostat. Faostat . Available online at: http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QC/visualize [Accessed January 18, 2020]
- Garg, A. K., Kim, J. K., Owens, T. G., Ranwala, A. P., Do Choi, Y., Kochian, L. V., et al. (2002). Trehalose accumulation in rice plants confers high tolerance levels to different abiotic stresses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 15898-15903. doi: 10.1073/pnas.252637799
- Garsmeur, O., Droc, G., Antonise, R., Grimwood, J., Potier, B., Aitken, K., et al. (2018). A mosaic monoploid reference sequence for the highly complex genome of sugarcane. Nat. Commun. 9:2638. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-05051-5
- Goldner, W., Thom, M., and Maretzki, A. (1991). Sucrose metabolism in sugarcane cell suspension cultures. Plant Sci. 73, 143-147. doi: 10.1016/0168-9452(91) 90021-Y
- Gong, X., Su, Q., Lin, D., Jiang, Q., Xu, J., Zhang, J., et al. (2014). The rice OsV4 encoding a novel pentatricopeptide repeat protein is required for chloroplast development during the early leaf stage under cold stress. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 56, 400-410. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12138
- Goodstein, D. M., Shu, S., Howson, R., Neupane, R., Hayes, R. D., Fazo, J., et al. (2012). Phytozome: a comparative platform for green plant genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D1178-D1186. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr944
- Grabherr, M. G., Haas, B. J., Yassour, M., Levin, J. Z., Thompson, D. A., Amit, I., et al. (2011). Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 644-652. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1883
- Grandbastien, M. A. (1998). Activation of plant retrotransposons under stress conditions. Trends Plant Sci. 3, 181-187. doi: 10.1016/S1360-1385(98)01 232-1
- Gu, Y., and Somerville, C. (2010). Cellulose synthase interacting protein: a new factor in cellulose synthesis. Plant Signal. Behav. 5, 1571-1574. doi: 10.4161/ psb.5.12.13621
- Guilfoyle, T. J., and Hagen, G. (2001). Auxin response factors. J. Plant Growth Regul. 20, 281-291. doi: 10.1007/s003440010026
- Guilfoyle, T. J., and Hagen, G. (2007). Auxin response factors. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 10, 453-460. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2007.08.014
- Hagen, G., and Guilfoyle, T. (2002). Auxin-responsive gene expression: genes, promoters and regulatory factors. Plant Mol. Biol. 49, 373-385. doi: 10.1023/A: 1015207114117
- Hernández-Blanco, C., Feng, D. X., Hu, J., Sánchez-Vallet, A., Deslandes, L., Llorente, F., et al. (2007). Impairment of cellulose synthases required for Arabidopsis secondary cell wall formation enhances disease resistance. Plant Cell 19, 890-903. doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.048058
- Hichri, I., Barrieu, F., Bogs, J., Kappel, C., Delrot, S., and Lauvergeat, V. (2011). Recent advances in the transcriptional regulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. J. Exp. Bot. 62, 2465-2483. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq442
- Hobo, T., Kowyama, Y., and Hattori, T. (1999). A bZIP factor, TRAB1, interacts with VP1 and mediates abscisic acid- induced transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 15348-15353. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.26.15348
- Hu, W., Hua, X., Zhang, Q., Wang, J., Shen, Q., Zhang, X., et al. (2018). New insights into the evolution and functional divergence of the SWEET family in Saccharum based on comparative genomics. BMC Plant Biol. 18:270. doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1495-y
- Irish, E. E. (1997). Experimental analysis of tassel development in the maize mutant tassel seed 6. Plant Physiol. 114, 817-825. doi: 10.1104/pp.114.3.817
- Jadoski, C. J., and Ono, E. O. (2011). Physiology aspects of sugarcane production. Appl. Res. Agrotechnol. 3, 223-230. doi: 10.5777/paet.v3i3.1065
- Jin, J., Tian, F., Y ang, D., Meng, Y., Kong, L., Luo, J., et al. (2017). PlantTFDB 4 . 0: toward a central hub for transcription factors and regulatory interactions in plants. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 1040-1045. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw982
- Ju, C., and Chang, C. (2015). Mechanistic insights in ethylene perception and signal transduction. Plant Physiol. 169, 85-95. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.00845
- Jun, S. H., Han, M. J., Lee, S., Seo, Y. S., Kim, W. T., and An, G. (2004). OsEIN2 is a positive component in ethylene signaling in rice. Plant Cell Physiol . 45, 281-289. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pch033
- Jung, C., Jun, S. S., Sang, W. H., Yeon, J. K., Chung, H. K., Sang, I. S., et al. (2008). Overexpression of AtMYB44 enhances stomatal closure to confer abiotic stress tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol. 146, 623-635. doi: 10.1104/ pp.107.110981
- Kaffka, S. R., and Grantz, D. A. (2014). Sugar crops. Encycl. Agric. Food Syst. 5, 240-260. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52512-3.00150-9
- Kasirajan, L., Hoang, N. V., Furtado, A., Botha, F. C., and Henry, R. J. (2018). Transcriptome analysis highlights key differentially expressed genes involved in cellulose and lignin biosynthesis of sugarcane genotypes varying in fiber content. Sci. Rep. 8:11612. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30033-4
- Kidwell, M. G. (2002). Transposable Elements And The Evolution Of Genome Size In Eukaryotes . Available online at: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/ 10.1023%2FA%3A1016072014259.pdf [Accessed May 28, 2019].
- Kim, D., Langmead, B., and Salzberg, S. L. (2015). HISAT: A fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements. Nat. Methods 12, 357-360. doi: 10.1038/nmeth. 3317
- Langfelder, P., and Horvath, S. (2008). WGCNA: An R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9:559. doi: 10.1186/14712105-9-559
- Langfelder, P., Mischel, P. S., and Horvath, S. (2013). When is hub gene selection better than standard meta-analysis? PLoS One 8:e61505. doi: 10.1371/journal. pone.0061505
- Lee, S.-I., and Kim, N.-S. (2014). Transposable elements and genome size variations in plants. Genomics Inform. 12:87. doi: 10.5808/gi.2014.12.3.87
- Lemoine, R., La Camera, S., Atanassova, R., Dédaldéchamp, F., Allario, T., Pourtau, N., et al. (2013). Source-to-sink transport of sugar and regulation by environmental factors. Front. Plant Sci. 4:272. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00272
- Li, G., Siddiqui, H., Teng, Y., Lin, R., Wan, X. Y., Li, J., et al. (2011). Coordinated transcriptional regulation underlying the circadian clock in Arabidopsis . Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 616-622. doi: 10.1038/ncb2219
- Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K., and Shi, W. (2014). FeatureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30, 923-930. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656
- Lingle, S. E., and Smith, R. C. (1991). Sucrose metabolism related to growth and ripening in sugarcane internodes. Crop Sci. 31:172. doi: 10.2135/cropsci1991. 0011183x003100010039x
- Ma, L., Tian, T., Lin, R., Deng, X. W., Wang, H., and Li, G. (2016). Arabidopsis FHY3andFAR1regulate light-induced myo-inositol biosynthesis and oxidative stress responses by transcriptional activation of MIPS1. Mol. Plant 9, 541-557. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.12.013
- Mao, G., Seebeck, T., Schrenker, D., and Yu, O. (2013). CYP709B3, a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase gene involved in salt tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana . BMC Plant Biol. 13:169. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-169
- Mattiello, L., Riaño-Pachón, D. M., Martins, M. C. M., da Cruz, L. P., Bassi, D., Marchiori, P. E. R., et al. (2015). Physiological and transcriptional analyses

- of developmental stages along sugarcane leaf. BMC Plant Biol. 15:300. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0694-z
- Medeiros, C., Almeida Balsalobre, T. W., and Carneiro, M. S. (2020). Molecular diversity and genetic structure of Saccharum complex accessions. PLoS One 15:e0233211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233211
- Ming, R., Moore, P. H., Wu, K. K., D'Hont, A., Glaszmann, J. C., Tew, T. L., et al. (2010). Sugarcane improvement through breeding and biotechnology. Plant Breed. Rev. 27, 115-118. doi: 10.1002/9780470650349.ch2
- Mitchell, H. J., Hall, J. L., and Barber, M. S. (1994). Elicitor-induced cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase activity in lignifying wheat ( Triticum aestivum L.) Leaves. Plant Physiol. 104, 551-556. doi: 10.1104/pp.104.2.551
- Mockaitis, K., and Estelle, M. (2004). Integrating transcriptional controls for plant cell expansion. Genome Biol. 5:245. doi: 10.1186/gb-2004-5-11-245
- Moore, P. H., and Cosgrove, D. J. (1991). Developmental changes in cell and tissue water relations parameters in storage parenchyma of sugarcane. Plant Physiol. 96, 794-801. doi: 10.1104/pp.96.3.794
- Moore, P., and Botha, F. (2014). Sugarcane: Physiology, Biochemistry, and Functional Biology . Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Nishiyama, M. Y., Ferreira, S. S., Tang, P.-Z., Becker, S., Pörtner-Taliana, A., and Souza, G. M. (2014). Full-length enriched cDNA libraries and ORFeome analysis of sugarcane hybrid and ancestor genotypes. PLoS One 9:14. doi: 10. 1371/journal.pone.0107351
- Noda, K. I., Glover, B. J., Linstead, P., and Martin, C. (1994). Flower colour intensity depends on specialized cell shape controlled by a Myb-related transcription factor. Nature 369, 661-664. doi: 10.1038/369661a0
- Nover, L., Bharti, K., Do, P., Mishra, S. K., and Ganguli, A. (2001). Arabidopsis and the heat stress transcription factor world: how many heat stress transcription factors do we need? Cell Stress Chaperones 6, 177-189.
- Onodera, Y., Suzuki, A., Wu, C. Y., Washida, H., and Takaiwa, F. (2001). A rice functional transcriptional activator, RISBZ1, responsible for endospermspecific expression of storage protein genes through GCN4 motif. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 14139-14152. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007405200
- Papini-Terzi, F. S., Rocha, F. R., Vêncio, R. Z. N. N., Felix, J. M., Branco, D. S., Waclawovsky, A. J., et al. (2009). Sugarcane genes associated with sucrose content. BMC Genomics 10:120. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-120
- Partida, V. G. S., Dias, H. M., Corcino, D. S. M., and Van Sluys, M. A. (2021). Sucrose-phosphate phosphatase from sugarcane reveals an ancestral tandem duplication. BMC Plant Biol. 21:23. doi: 10.1186/s12870-020-02795-5
- Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M. I., Irizarry, R. A., and Kingsford, C. (2017). Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nat. Methods 14, 417-419. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4197
- Piperidis, N., D'Hont, A., and D'Hont, A. (2020). Sugarcane genome architecture decrypted with chromosome-specific oligo probes. Plant J. 103, 2039-2051. doi: 10.1111/tpj.14881
- Piperidis, N., and D'Hont, A. (2020). Sugarcane genome architecture decrypted with chromosome-specific oligo probes. Plant J. 103, 2039-2051.
- Premachandran, M. N., Prathima, P. T., and Lekshmi, M. (2011). Sugarcane and polyploidy - a review. J. Sugarcane Res. 1, 1-15.
- Rae, A. L., Grof, C. P. L., Casu, R. E., and Bonnett, G. D. (2005). Sucrose accumulation in the sugarcane stem: pathways and control points for transport and compartmentation. Field Crops Res. 92, 159-168. doi: 10.1016/j.fcr.2005.01. 027
- Ranocha, P., Denancé, N., Vanholme, R., Freydier, A., Martinez, Y., Hoffmann, L., et al. (2010). Walls are thin 1 (WAT1), an Arabidopsis homolog of Medicago truncatula NODULIN21, is a tonoplast-localized protein required for secondary wall formation in fibers. Plant J. 63, 469-483. doi: 10.1111/j.1365313X.2010.04256.x
- Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J., and Smyth, G. K. (2010). edgeR: a bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139-140. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/ btp616
- Sauter, M., and Kende, H. (1992). Levels of b -glucan and lignin in elongating internodes of deepwater rice. Plant Cell Physiol. 33, 1089-1097. doi: 10.1093/ oxfordjournals.pcp.a078360
- Schwacke, R., Ponce-Soto, G. Y., Krause, K., Bolger, A. M., Arsova, B., Hallab, A., et al. (2019). MapMan4: a refined protein classification and annotation framework applicable to multi-omics data analysis. Mol. Plant 12, 879-892. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2019.01.003
- Segarra, G., Van Der Ent, S., Trillas, I., and Pieterse, C. M. J. (2009). MYB72, a node of convergence in induced systemic resistance triggered by a fungal and a bacterial beneficial microbe. Plant Biol. 11, 90-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1438-8677. 2008.00162.x
- Shannon, P., Markiel, A., Ozier, O., Baliga, N. S., Wang, J. T., Ramage, D., et al. (2003). Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 13, 2498-2504. doi: 10.1101/ gr.1239303
- Sibout, R., Eudes, A., Mouille, G., Pollet, B., Lapierre, C., Jouanin, L., et al. (2005). Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase-C and -D are the primary genes involved in lignin biosynthesis in the floral stem of arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17, 2059-2076. doi: 10.1105/tpc.105.030767
- Simão, F. A., Waterhouse, R. M., Ioannidis, P., Kriventseva, E. V., and Zdobnov, E. M. (2015). BUSCO: assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 31, 3210-3212. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/btv351
- Slewinski, T. L. (2012). Non-structural carbohydrate partitioning in grass stems: a target to increase yield stability, stress tolerance, and biofuel production. J. Exp. Bot. 63, 4647-4670. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers124
- Soneson, C., Love, M. I., and Robinson, M. D. (2015). Differential analyses for RNA-seq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences. F1000Research 4:1521. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.7563.1
- Sung, S.-J. S., Xu, D.-P., and Black, C. C. (1989). Identification of Actively Filling Sucrose Sinks. Plant Physiol. 89, 1117-1121. doi: 10.1104/pp.89.4.1117
- Sung, T. Y., Tseng, C. C., and Hsieh, M. H. (2010). The SLO1 PPR protein is required for RNA editing at multiple sites with similar upstream sequences in Arabidopsis mitochondria . Plant J. 63, 499-511. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010. 04258.x
- Taylor, N. G., Howells, R. M., Huttly, A. K., Vickers, K., and Turner, S. R. (2003). Interactions among three distinct CesA proteins essential for cellulose synthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 1450-1455. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0337628100
- Thimm, O., Bläsing, O., Gibon, Y., Nagel, A., Meyer, S., Krüger, P., et al. (2004). MAPMAN: A user-driven tool to display genomics data sets onto diagrams of metabolic pathways and other biological processes. Plant J. 37, 914-939. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02016.x
- Thirugnanasambandam, P. P., Hoang, N. V., Furtado, A., Botha, F. C., and Henry, R. J. (2017). Association of variation in the sugarcane transcriptome with sugar content. BMC Genomics 18:909. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4302-5
- Tobias, C. M., and Chow, E. K. (2005). Structure of the cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase gene family in rice and promoter activity of a member associated with lignification. Planta 220, 678-688. doi: 10.1007/s00425-004-1385-4
- Tokunaga, N., Kaneta, T., Sato, S., and Sato, Y. (2009). Analysis of expression profiles of three peroxidase genes associated with lignification in Arabidopsis thaliana . Physiol. Plant. 136, 237-249. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2009.01 233.x
- Usadel, B., Obayashi, T., Mutwil, M., Giorgi, F. M., Bassel, G. W., Tanimoto, M., et al. (2009). Co-expression tools for plant biology: opportunities for hypothesis generation and caveats. Plant Cell Environ. 32, 1633-1651. doi: 10.1111/j.13653040.2009.02040.x
- Van Dijken, A. J. H., Schluepmann, H., and Smeekens, S. C. M. (2004). Arabidopsis trehalose-6-phosphate synthase 1 is essential for normal vegetative growth and transition to flowering. Plant Physiol. 135, 969-977. doi: 10.1104/pp.104. 039743
- Van Ha, C., Le, D. T., Nishiyama, R., Watanabe, Y., Sulieman, S., Tran, U. T., et al. (2013). The auxin response factor transcription factor family in soybean: genome-wide identification and expression analyses during development and water stress. DNA Res. 20, 511-524. doi: 10.1093/dnares/dst027
- Vatén, A., Dettmer, J., Wu, S., Stierhof, Y. D., Miyashima, S., Yadav, S. R., et al. (2011). Callose biosynthesis regulates symplastic trafficking during root development. Dev. Cell 21, 1144-1155. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.10.006
- Verma, A. K., Upadhyay, S. K., Verma, P. C., Solomon, S., and Singh, S. B. (2011b). Functional analysis of sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS) and sucrose synthase (SS) in sugarcane ( Saccharum ) cultivars. Plant Biol. 13, 325-332. doi: 10.1111/j. 1438-8677.2010.00379.x
- Verma, A. K., Upadhyay, S. K., Srivastava, M. K., Verma, P. C., Solomon, S., and Singh, S. B. (2011a). Transcript expression and soluble acid invertase activity during sucrose accumulation in sugarcane. Acta Physiol. Plant. 33, 1749-1757. doi: 10.1007/s11738-011-0711-2

- Vicentini, R., Bottcher, A., Dos Santos Brito, M., Dos Santos, A. B., Creste, S., De Andrade Landell, M. G., et al. (2015). Large-scale transcriptome analysis of two sugarcane genotypes contrasting for lignin content. PLoS One 10:e0134909. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134909
- Waclawovsky, A. J., Sato, P. M., Lembke, C. G., Moore, P. H., and Souza, G. M. (2010). Sugarcane for bioenergy production: an assessment of yield and regulation of sucrose content. Plant Biotechnol. J. 8, 263-276. doi: 10.1111/j. 1467-7652.2009.00491.x
- Waese, J., Fan, J., Pasha, A., Yu, H., Fucile, G., Shi, R., et al. (2017). ePlant: visualizing and exploring multiple levels of data for hypothesis generation in plant biology. Plant Cell 29, 1806-1821. doi: 10.1105/tpc.17.00073
- Wang, G., Long, Y., Thomma, B. P. H. J., de Wit, P. J. G. M., Angenent, G. C., and Fiers, M. (2010). Functional analyses of the Clavata2-like proteins and their domains that contribute to CLAVATA2 specificity. Plant Physiol. 152, 320-331. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.148197
- Wang, J. G., Zhao, T. T., Wang, W. Z., Feng, C. L., Feng, X. Y., Xiong, G. R., et al. (2019). Culm transcriptome sequencing of Badila ( Saccharum officinarum L.) and analysis of major genes involved in sucrose accumulation. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 144, 455-465. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2019.10.016
- Wang, L., and Ruan, Y.-L. (2013). Regulation of cell division and expansion by sugar and auxin signaling. Front. Plant Sci. 4:163. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00163
- Wang, W., Tang, W., Ma, T., Niu, D., Jin, J. B., Wang, H., et al. (2016). A pair of light signaling factors FHY3 and FAR1 regulates plant immunity by modulating chlorophyll biosynthesis. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 58, 91-103. doi: 10.1111/jipb. 12369
- Whittaker, A., and Botha, F. C. (1997). Carbon partitioning during sucrose accumulation in sugarcane internodal tissue. Plant Physiol. 115, 1651-1659. doi: 10.1104/pp.115.4.1651
- Xiang, C., Miao, Z., and Lam, E. (1997). DNA-binding properties, genomic organization and expression pattern of TGA6, a new member of the TGA family of bZIP transcription factors in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Mol. Biol. 34, 403-415. doi: 10.1023/A:1005873500238
- Yilmaz, A., Nishiyama, M. Y., Fuentes, B. G., Souza, G. M., Janies, D., Gray, J., et al. (2009). GRASSIUS: A platform for comparative regulatory genomics across the grasses. Plant Physiol. 149, 171-180. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.128579
- Young, M. D., Wakefield, M. J., Smyth, G. K., and Oshlack, A. (2010). Gene ontology analysis for RNA-seq: accounting for selection bias. Genome Biol. 11:R14. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-2-r14
- Yuan, Y., Xu, X., Gong, Z., Tang, Y., Wu, M. Yan, F., et al. (2019). Auxin response factor 6A regulates photosynthesis, sugar accumulation, and fruit development in tomato. Hortic. Res. 6:85. doi: 10.1038/s41438-019-0167-x
- Zhang, J., Zhang, X., Tang, H., Zhang, Q., Hua, X., Ma, X., et al. (2018). Alleledefined genome of the autopolyploid sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Nat. Genet. 50, 1565-1573. doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0237-2
- Zhu, Y. J., Komor, E., and Moore, P. H. (1997). Sucrose accumulation in the sugarcane stem is regulated by the difference between the activities of soluble acid invertase and sucrose phosphate synthase. Plant Physiol. 115, 609-616. doi: 10.1104/pp.115.2.609
- Zou, M., Guan, Y., Ren, H., Zhang, F., and Chen, F. (2008). A bZIP transcription factor, OsABI5, is involved in rice fertility and stress tolerance. Plant Mol. Biol. 66, 675-683. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9 298-4

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher's Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Copyright © 2021 Hosaka, Correr, da Silva, Sforça, Barreto, Balsalobre, Pasha, de Souza, Provart, Carneiro and Margarido. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
METHODS
## RNA Extraction and Sequencing

We extracted total RNA with the RNeasy Plant Mini kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, United States) following the manufacturer's instructions. We assessed RNA concentration

and the RNA integrity number (RIN) with the Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States).

Next, we generated mRNA libraries following the Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA kit protocol and sequenced the 48 libraries in six lanes of an Illumina HiSeq 2500 to generate paired-end reads (2 GLYPH&lt;2&gt; 100 bp).
DATA AVAILABILITY
## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ ena, PRJEB40481.
        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 16:56:10,633 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 16:56:10,637 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 16:56:10,637 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 16:56:10,637 - INFO - {"type": "function", "name": "extract_accession_info", "parameters": {"text": "The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena, PRJEB40481."}}
2025-10-28 16:56:10,637 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJEB40481/10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf

2025-10-28 16:56:10,643 - INFO - detected formats: [<InputFormat.PDF: 'pdf'>]
2025-10-28 16:56:10,648 - INFO - Going to convert document batch...
2025-10-28 16:56:10,648 - INFO - Initializing pipeline for StandardPdfPipeline with options hash 5f7f6517f72f4ee63b4977e857fdeb61
2025-10-28 16:56:10,649 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:56:12,205 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:56:12,943 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:56:13,269 - INFO - Processing document 10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf
2025-10-28 16:56:20,452 - INFO - Finished converting document 10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf in 9.81 sec.
2025-10-28 16:56:20,475 - WARNING - Parameter `strict_text` has been deprecated and will be ignored.
2025-10-28 16:56:20,478 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:56:20,479 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:56:20,484 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.1590_1678-4685-GMB-2022-0286.pdf
2025-10-28 16:56:20,484 - INFO - Characters: 75568
2025-10-28 16:56:20,485 - INFO - Words (approx): 11548
2025-10-28 16:56:20,485 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 15012.4
2025-10-28 16:56:20,485 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 16:56:20,486 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 16:56:20,486 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        <!-- image -->

Research Article Plant Genetics

## Sampling strategies for sugarcane using either clonal replicates or diverse genotypes can bias the conclusions of RNA-Seq studies

Victor Hugo Mello 1  , Ana Letycia Basso Garcia 1  , Fernando Henrique Correr 1  , Guilherme Kenichi Hosaka 1  , Monalisa Sampaio Carneiro 2  and Gabriel Rodrigues Alves Margarido 1 

1 Universidade de São Paulo, Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, Departamento de Genética, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.

2 Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Centro de Ciências Agrárias, Departamento de Biotecnologia e Produção Vegetal e Animal, Araras, SP , Brazil.

## Abstract

A key procedure for ensuring statistical confidence in differential gene expression analyses is to use biological replicates to compare distinct groups. Biological replicates allow the estimation of the residual variation in the gene expression levels among samples of a given experimental condition. In sugarcane, it is possible to obtain an estimate of residual variability at two levels: among samples of distinct genotypes of the same experimental treatment, or clonal replicates of the same genotype. The sequencing costs are often a limitation to leveraging both these levels in the same study, stressing the relevance of efforts to determine an appropriate experimental design. We aim to investigate this question by comparing the transcriptional profiles of young sugarcane culms with different sucrose levels using both sampling strategies. Our results show that clonal replicates provided enough statistical power to identify nearly three times more deferentially expressed genes than the more diverse strategy. However, it resulted in potentially less meaningful biological results, because many of the significant genes were likely related to the particular genotype of choice, rather than representing a common expression profile for the compared groups. This study supports the development of sound experimental designs in new studies regarding differential expression for sugarcane.

Keywords: Differential gene expression, vegetatively propagated crops, biological replicates, sugarcane transcriptomics, missing samples.

Received: October 08, 2022; Accepted: January 31, 2023.

## Introduction

The genus Saccharum comprises six species, of which S. spontaneum and S. robustum are the only wild representatives, spread over a large area in Asia and Indonesia, and the others are  domesticated species S.  officinarum , S.  barberi , S. sinense , and S. edule .  The first sugarcane hybrids were obtained from the crossing of S.  officinarum and S.  spontaneum , followed by backcrossing to S. officinarum , such that they inherited the high sugar yield from the former species and the pathogen resistance, adaptability, and increased vigor of the  latter  (Irvine,  1999;  Piperidis et  al. ,  2010).  Sugarcane cultivation accounts for 86% of the worldwide production of  sugar,  despite  the  increasing  allocation  of  its  juice  for ethanol production. Moreover, the sugarcane residue after juice extraction, called bagasse, is a byproduct that can be used for energy generation and production of bioplastics (Aguilar et  al., 2019;  OECD/FAO, 2020). The crop is a renewable source of fuel and presents a significant advantage over fossil fuels due to the reduced emission of greenhouse gases (Goldemberg, 2008).

Sugarcane breeding programs usually rely on a few recurrent crosses between elite parents or wild germplasm to

Send  correspondence  to  Gabriel  Rodrigues Alves  Margarido. Universidade de São Paulo, Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, Departamento de Genética, Avenida Pádua Dias, 11, 13418-900, Piracicaba, SP , Brazil. E-mail: gramarga@usp.br.

produce genotypes with desired traits, mainly sugar or fiber yield and resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses (Heinz and Tew, 1987; de Souza Barbosa et al., 2002; Jackson, 2005). Therefore, each breeding program develops new hybrid varieties per cycle, a few of which are commercially released (Cursi et al. , 2022). From the milieu of available genotypes, scientific investigations in sugarcane are often based on a few elite lines that are recurrently used. For instance, two genome assemblies were recently published for the hybrids R570 - a major model in sugarcane genomic studies - and SP80-3280 (Garsmeur et al ., 2018; Souza et al., 2019). These efforts are remarkably relevant for sugarcane genomic research, given the complexity of its genome.

Also, these hybrids show a large variation in chromosome number and genome constitution. S. officinarum (2n = 8x = 80) and S. spontaneum (2n = 40-128), the parental species, have high levels of ploidy and complex genomes per se (Bremer, 1925; Panje and Babu, 1960). Chromosome number multiplicity and molecular evidence have led to the acceptance of the basic number of x = 8 for S. spontaneum (Liu et al. , 2016); however, the description of a wild accession with x = 10 brought a new panorama to the evolutionary history of the genus (Meng et al. , 2020). These facts reveal an intricate set of hurdles concerning the understanding of sugarcane genomics, which must be considered for data-driven experiments. Hence, many sugarcane studies focus on transcriptomic data to avoid the challenges imposed by its genome (at least partially).

More specifically, the use of phenotypic trait variation between genotypes is a common approach found in differential expression studies. Gene expression studies in sugarcane have been conducted using a single genotype to represent the phenotypic group (Casu et al., 2007; Papini-Terzi et al., 2009; Casu et al., 2015; Vicentini et al., 2015; Dharshini et al., 2016; Rody et al., 2019; Nawae et al. , 2020; Selvi et al., 2020), as well as multiple genotypes per group (Papini-Terzi et al., 2009; Ferreira et al., 2016; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017; Hoang et al., 2017; Correr et al., 2020). Biological replicates provide more accurate estimates of transcript abundances when comparing samples from two treatment levels. Clones from the same genotype are subject to variability in their expression levels due to factors such as interactions with the environment and other organisms. Still, the transcriptional variation within clones is expected to be smaller when compared to plants from different genotypes, which decreases the dispersion of gene quantification estimates. Statistical parameters such as means of expression levels and their residual variances are the main variables considered in modern differential expression tests, which highlights the relevance of the choice of approach for performing these studies. While the use of clones renders a more homogeneous set of samples, and consequently more statistical power to detect differences in  expression between groups, it also restrains the set of samples to a limited number of genotypes. Nevertheless, other concerns about the comparison of contrasting groups in RNA-Seq analysis were raised, such as minimum sample sizes and the use of technical replicates for ensuring reproducibility (Conesa et al., 2016).

Here,  we  evaluate  the  influence  of  using  clonal replicates  or  multiple  genotypes  in  the  contrasting  groups when performing differential  gene  expression  analysis. The comparison of approaches we propose relies both on quantitative estimates of differentially expressed genes and qualitative functional enrichment tests. We aim to present an information-based criterion for selecting biological replicates for  further  experiments using RNA-Seq, particularly for sugarcane, whose genomic properties can deviate dramatically among genotypes.

## Material and Methods

## Biological material and RNA-Seq

The genotypes chosen for this study are part of the Brazilian Panel of Sugarcane Genotypes, located in Araras Brazil. They were selected from 254 genotypes to represent elite lines and commercial hybrids used in Brazil, as well as ancestral species of the Saccharum complex (Medeiros et al., 2020). First, for the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), we selected 12 genotypes and separated them into four groups with three members each. This categorization divided genotypes based on their content of soluble solids, measured in ºBrix: VLB (Very Low ºBrix), LB (Low ºBrix), HB (High ºBrix), VHB (Very High ºBrix). The phenotypic characterization of this panel of genotypes, including the content of soluble solids, is described in Barreto et al. (2019). Next, for the strategy based on clones (SBC), we chose one representative of each group and used three clonal replicates of these genotypes to represent the corresponding phenotypic groups (Table 1).

Immature culms (internode +1) from all 24 plants were collected in June 2016, in Araras, followed by extraction of total RNA with the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. We prepared the RNASeq libraries of polyadenylated transcripts using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT (Illumina) protocol. These libraries were sequenced in a HiSeq 2500 equipment (Illumina), resulting in paired-end reads 2x100 bp long. The 12 libraries of the SBC were sequenced in three lanes, in combination with other samples not used in this study, with final sequencing depth corresponding to eight samples per lane. For the SBDG we used a single lane exclusively for the twelve samples.

Table 1 Genotypes selected to compose each ºBrix group for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and based on diverse genotypes (SBDG). In the former strategy, we sampled the immature internode +1 of three clonal replicates (R1, R2, and R3) for each genotype per group, and samples from three different genotypes per group for the latter. The genotypes IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 were represented in both strategies, using samples from different plants.

| Group   | Genotype          |   # of samples in SBC |   # of samples in SBDG | Soluble solids (ºBrix ± s.d.)   |
|---------|-------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|
|         | Krakatau          |                     0 |                      1 | 12.03 ± 2.02                    |
| VLB     | SES205A           |                     0 |                      1 | 13.99 ± 3.14                    |
|         | IN84-58           |                     3 |                      1 | 14.78 ± 1.89                    |
|         | Criolla Rayada    |                     0 |                      1 | 16.53 ± 1.37                    |
| LB      | IJ76-317          |                     0 |                      1 | 17.68 ± 1.75                    |
|         | F36-819           |                     3 |                      1 | 18.05 ± 1.51                    |
|         | White Transparent |                     0 |                      1 | 19.60 ± 2.01                    |
| HB      | RB92579           |                     0 |                      1 | 19.77 ± 1.29                    |
|         | R570              |                     3 |                      1 | 20.69 ± 1.24                    |
|         | White Mauritius   |                     0 |                      1 | 21.25 ± 1.38                    |
| VHB     | SP80-3280         |                     3 |                      1 | 21.29 ± 1.88                    |
|         | RB835486          |                     0 |                      1 | 21.85 ± 1.86                    |

## Downsampling and quality control

Because the SBC data showed higher average counts per sample, we first carried out a downsampling step. This procedure aimed to balance the differences in sequencing depth between both datasets, achieving the same amount of information for the two strategies. For that, we applied the sample function of the Seqtk suite (https://github.com/lh3/ seqtk), using as parameters a fixed random seed -s100 and the probability of removing a read proportional to the ratio of the average read counts of SBDG and SBC samples. After that, we used the programs Cutadapt v1.18 (Martin, 2011) and Trimmomatic v0.38 (Bolger et al. , 2014) to: i) trim residual sequences of Illumina adapters from raw reads; ii) remove base pairs with Phred score less than 20 in a window of 5bp; iii) trim the first 13bp of each read; and iv) remove paired reads shorter than 50 bp (Table S1).

## De novo transcriptome assembly and functional annotation

We chose to perform a de novo transcriptome assembly based on all samples to minimize the potential effect of representation biases on genes and alleles from different genotypes. For that, we used the libraries after downsampling and quality control as input to Trinity v2.8.0 (Grabherr et al., 2011), using the default parameters except for the normalization by readset. Functional annotation was carried out with blastx and blastp (Altschul et al., 1990) significant hits (e-value &lt; 10 -5 ) against the Swiss-Prot database, using ORFs identified in the transcriptome with Transdecoder (https://github.com/ TransDecoder/TransDecoder). We also annotated protein domains using hmmscan v3.2.1 (Eddy, 2009) with the Pfam database. All these sources of information were compiled with the software Trinotate v3.1.1 (https://github.com/Trinotate/ Trinotate) to produce the final annotation. This reference was further assessed by the identification of conserved orthologs among green plants and monocotyledons, using the software BUSCO v3 (Simão et al., 2015) with databases in OrthoDB10.

Next, we used the quasi-mapping strategy of salmon v0.12.0 (Patro et  al., 2017)  to  quantify  the  expression  of the assembled transcripts, separately for each sample. The transcriptome file was used to build an index with a k-mer size of 31 bp, with the additional parameters of GC bias correction and validate mappings to achieve higher mapping rates and confidence levels. We then summarized transcript counts per gene and normalized to obtain expression estimates in counts per million (CPM). CPM values were used to quantify gene expression for all downstream analyses.

## Comparison of differential expression results with the full dataset

For differential expression analyses, we initially excluded lowly expressed genes, by filtering out genes that did not show a CPM greater than one for at least three samples. We did this filtering individually for each strategy, resulting in different sets of filtered genes for SBC and SBDG. Next, the following steps were repeated with the same criteria for both strategies, using the edgeR package (Robinson et al., 2010). We normalized the gene counts with the trimmed mean of

M-values method (Robinson and Oshlack , 2010) and built MDS (Multidimensional scaling) plots using the top 2,000 genes with the greatest pairwise variation between samples.

For  statistical  tests  of  differential  expression,  we considered a model for gene counts parametrized as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for sample i in an experimental group, gene g , π g,i the fraction of gene counts per gene and sample, dispersion Φ g , libraries size N i , average counts µ g,i = N i π g,i , and variance Φ g = π g,i ( 1+π g,i Φ g ). The common dispersion is the squared Biological Coefficient of Variation (BCV), which considers the common dispersion from all genes. The use of a local regression of genewise dispersion provides an additional level of information for dispersion estimates for each gene. As a result, Φ g represents a compromise between the dispersion of counts for gene g and the borrowed genewise dispersion from genes with close average CPM.

3 2 We designed three orthogonal contrasts to test for differential expression for each gene, namely VLB × VHB. HB.LB, corresponding to the null hypothesis H 0 :π g,VLB = π g,VHB +  π g,HB +  π g,LB  , VHB × HB.LB  to H 0 :π g,VHB = π g,HB + π g,LB , and HB × LB to H 0 :π g,HB = π g,LB .   A likelihood  ratio test was performed for each combination of gene, contrast, and strategy to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), with p-values adjusted by the false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) at a 0.05 significance threshold.

Using the sets of DEGs and the annotated transcriptome, we performed functional enrichment analyses considering the frequency of Gene Ontology (GO) terms in the background reference and each set. Because the average gene length may vary among GO categories, care was taken to calculate effective gene lengths, based on the average length of genes in each sample weighted by their expression levels. We used the goseq package (Young et al., 2010) to perform the functional enrichment test for each represented GO term (p &lt; 0.01, after adjusting for multiple tests with the FDR approach).

## Impact of missing samples on differential expression results

In addition to using all samples of each strategy, we also analyzed the effect of systematically removing samples on the differential expression results. This procedure can provide a better understanding of the effect of individual samples on the downstream analysis, as well as establishing a comparison between this approach and the use of full data. We have developed a method to compare different combinations of subsets of samples, under the condition that valid combinations must have at least two samples per group. This restriction is necessary because minimal replication per group is required to properly calculate gene dispersions, even if the estimates are less accurate. Because there are four groups with three samples each, 255 combinations exist, all of which were individually tested for differential expression with the same contrasts previously designed. The number of combinations

of  different  numbers of removed samples is given by the binomial factor:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which k represents the number of samples per group ( k = 3 ), g represents the number of groups ( g = 4 ), and i represents the number of removed samples, ranging from one to four. For each combination, we removed genes with low expression levels (CPM &gt; 1 in less than two samples) and recorded the differential expression result as one of the following categories: (a) upregulated, (b) downregulated, (c) not significant, or (d) filtered out. One result was obtained for each gene, combination of samples, contrast and sampling strategy. We applied the same workflow for performing differential expression and functional enrichment tests as in the full data analyses.

Among all tested combinations of samples in our subsampling  evaluation,  one  of  special  interest  is  that composed of the eight genotypes present exclusively in SBDG. The strategy based on clones comprised a single genotype per group of soluble solids content, namely, IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 (Table 1). For SBDG, we chose another eight genotypes in addition to these, which we call exclusive genotypes of SBDG, specifically SES205A, Krakatau, Criolla Rayada, IJ76-317, White Transparent, RB92579, White Mauritius, and RB835486. We also performed analyses of differential expression with this subset of samples.

## Code and data availability

All the scripts are available at the Github repository (github.com/victor-h14/BiologicalReplicates). The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB44302 for SBDG and PRJEB40481 for SBC.

## Results

## Gene identification in the sugarcane transcriptome

The objective of our study was to compare the sampling strategies  based  on  clones  (SBC)  and  based  on  diverse genotypes (SBDG) for RNA-Seq studies. Because of that, we performed a de novo transcriptome assembly using all 24 samples from both sampling strategies to use as a reference for gene quantification. The resulting transcriptome included 598,874 transcripts for a total of 262,281 assembled genes (Table S2). Reads from both strategies were evenly represented in the assembly, with an average mapping rate of 76.5% among samples (Table S1). Genes had an average size of 932.63 bp and the transcript N50 was 1,687 bp. The majority of genes had a single corresponding transcript isoform (64.3%). To assess the quality of our transcriptome, we checked the representation of conserved single-copy orthologs from Viridiplantae  and  Liliopsida  clades  -  green  plants  and monocotyledons, respectively. We identified 95.1% of the 430 orthologs conserved in green plants without sequence fragmentation. For the set of orthologs in monocots, 93.1% of 3,278 orthologs were fully represented.

## Comparison of differential expression results between strategies

Our goal  was  to  compare  both  datasets  based  on the  results  from  the  differential  expression  and  functional enrichment analyses. We followed a standard procedure for these tasks using edgeR and goseq. After library sizes were normalized, the quantification outputs still contained a large amount of lowly expressed genes. We selected genes with CPM &gt; 1 in at least three samples, for each strategy separately, resulting in different sets of kept genes for SBC and SBDG. The former presented 42,566 genes after filtering, and 41,934 remained in the latter (Figure S1).

An  initial  exploratory  investigation  allowed  for assessing the main characteristics of expression profiles with a multidimensional scaling plot (Figure 1A). For the SBC, we observed clustering of replicates from each genotype, indicating high similarity in the expression profiles of clonal replicates.  As expected, the first dimension of the plot separated replicates of genotype IN84-58 from the remaining groups, reflecting their contrasting genetic backgrounds. On the other hand, the biological variance of gene expression was much higher in the diverse approach than in the clone approach. In SBDG we found a little overlap of samples from the same phenotypic group, except for the VLB genotypes, which again were isolated from the others by differences in the first component. No clear pattern was observed for genotypes of VHB and HB. In fact, only two LB S. officinarum accessions, Criolla Rayada and IJ76-316, clustered apart.

The MDS analysis provided a broad view of the overall patterns of transcription abundances for the set of samples, but did not allow a closer assessment of individual genes. We then used the differential expression testing approach for a detailed investigation of the transcriptome expression profiles. We arranged the four groups of samples into three orthogonal contrasts.  Hence, we conducted three tests of differential expression for each gene. The quantity of DEGs identified via the SBC largely surpassed that of SBDG for all contrasts, especially  in VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB  (Figure  1B, File S1). In these two contrasts, we can observe a mass of significant  DEGs in relatively low absolute logFC values for  SBC. Conversely, only a few DEGs were significant for  SBDG, even for genes showing fold changes of large magnitude. We identified non-significant genes even at |logF C| &gt; 10, standing for more than a thousand-fold variation of read counts. The non-significance of genes with high values of logFC is possible because the adopted likelihood model for gene abundance considers gene counts and variance within groups for the likelihood ratio test. We can thus (at least partly) attribute the lower number of DEGs for the SBDG to the higher residual variance in gene counts observed with this strategy. An indicator of dispersion with a meaningful interpretation is the Biological Coefficient of Variation (BCV), calculated as the square root of the negative binomial dispersion of counts. The average BCV for all filtered genes of the SBC was 0.087, and 0.440 for the SBDG, representing a five-fold variation between strategies. In addition, for the set of genes retained after filtering for both strategies (37,535 genes), 98% of them

showed higher BCV in the SBDG. These numbers reinforce the role of dispersion as a key parameter that distinguishes the approaches regarding differential expression.

The intersection of sets of DEGs between strategies revealed that the majority of genes identified as significant in the SBDG was also significant in the SBC, but the opposite was not true ( Figure 1E-G). About 71% of DEGs detected with the SBDG were shared with the other strategy, for each of  the  three  contrasts. This  fact  suggests  that  using  more diverse genotypes favored the identification of genes with similar expression patterns among the group members. The observation regarding the high residual variance for VHB x HB.LB and HB x LB also strengthens this hypothesis, because only the more homogeneously expressed genes achieved significance. On the other hand, the use of clones was also able to identify many other genes as differentially expressed, which are possibly genotype-specific and may not be directly associated with the phenotype of interest.

The current work presents a systematic analysis of the effects of competing strategies of biological replication over gene expression studies. Our goal is not to provide a biological interpretation of expression patterns, but to justify with biological reasoning the use of each methodology. Therefore, we chose the functional enrichment analysis as a meaningful approach for understanding the consequences of data-mining over the sets of filtered and differentially expressed genes. Within each set of genes that passed the expression filter, we found 12,364 and 11,979 genes containing at least one attributed GO term for SBC and SBDG, respectively (File S2).

Using these genes as a background reference, we performed a functional enrichment analysis to identify GO terms more frequent among DEGs than expected by chance alone ( Figure 2, File S3). For the SBDG, the contrast VHB x HB.LB resulted in only one enriched term (adenosine diphosphate binding), and HB x LB had no enriched GO.

## Assessment of strategies using subsets of samples

When  removing  a  fraction  of  samples  from  the experimental design, the average values of gene counts and variance are modified and less precise, such that the resulting set of DEGs may be different. For this reason, we adopted the strategy of systematically removing samples as a validating procedure of the expression results. Also, this approach evaluates the effect of variation on the number of samples per group, such as in unbalanced experiments, or missing samples. Handling mistakes, low volumes of biological material, difficulties in preparing the sequencing libraries, and other unexpected events often cause (random) loss of samples. Because each strategy includes 12 samples divided into four groups, and there must be at least two per group for estimating the dispersion parameter, we could jointly remove a maximum of four samples. These restrictions produced 255 combinations, which were individually tested for differential expression.

We observed that, as the number of removed samples changed from one to four, the more differential expression disagreed with the results obtained with the full dataset. Albeit at low rates, we could identify genes with an inverted result of

Figure 1 Gene expression patterns and differentially expressed genes for both sampling strategies. ( a ) Multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot showing pairwise distances between samples based on the most divergent genes for each pair. The panels represent the MDS plot for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), respectively. ( b , c , d ) Mean-difference plot grid showing differentially expressed genes for all contrasts and strategies. Fold changes (logFC) and average expression levels in counts per million (logCPM) are shown in base 2 log scales. The rows indicate the three orthogonal contrasts, while the columns correspond to the strategies of sampling biological replicates. Colors represent the result of differential expression tests (p &lt; 0.05, after FDR correction for multiple tests). ( e , f , g ) Differentially expressed genes shared by the strategies based on clones and on diverse genotypes. The diagrams represent the number of genes detected as significantly differentially expressed in the contrasts. The strategy based on clones is in blue, while the strategy based on diverse genotypes is in green. The figures represent orthogonal contrasts VLB × HB.LB. VHB ( b , e ), VHB × HB.LB ( c , f ), and HB × LB ( d , g ).

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 Enriched gene ontology terms by strategy and contrast. There was no significant test result for HB × LB in the strategy based on diverse genotypes (p &lt; 0.01, after FDR adjustment). The numeric axis represents the number of differentially expressed genes for each particular gene ontology term.

<!-- image -->

differential expression, i.e. , miscalls of up or downregulation, which occurred from 10 -6 to 10 -5 % of genes for the SBC, and from 10 -5 to 10 -4  % for the SBDG. Using the original data results as a gold standard (full set of samples), the strategy based on clones showed a relatively lower percentage of false negatives and a higher percentage of false positives - green and purple curves in (Figure 3), respectively.

Because our systematic removal of samples provided a large number of differential expression tests for each gene, we could establish a high confidence set of DEGs - those with at least 95% of tests with the same results ( Table 2). We then used this high confidence set for performing a functional enrichment analysis (Figure 4, File S4). The enriched GO terms for the full set of DEGs and the high confidence set were essentially different. There were only three enriched terms for the SBDG, of which two had also been detected with the full dataset, and the other was only significant for the SBC. Given the low number of annotated and differentially expressed genes for the contrasts VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB, it was not possible to detect any enriched term for the

Figure 3 Effect of sample removal on the results of differential expression. The values represented by the continuous (SBC) and dashed (SBDG) curves are the averages of differential expression tests for all possible combinations and contrasts, as a function of the number of removed samples. The red curve indicates the concordant genes in the original and subsampled datasets; in yellow, the differentially expressed genes with inverted results, whether up or downregulated; in green, genes that were not significant due to subsampling; in blue, filtered genes after subsampling; and in purple, genes that appeared as spuriously differentially expressed with subsampling.

<!-- image -->

Table 2 The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the high confidence set. We identified these genes as differentially expressed in at least 95% of the subsampling combinations when removing from one to four samples in each strategy. We considered only the combinations which presented a minimum of two samples per experimental group. For each strategy, we show the total number of DEGs and those annotated with gene ontology terms.

|                 | SBC DEGs   | SBC DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   |
|-----------------|------------|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Contrast        | Total      | Annotated  | Total       | Annotated   |
| VLB × VHB.HB.LB | 14240      | 2688       | 2960        | 458         |
| VHB × HB.LB     | 5774       | 829        | 44          | 7           |
| HB × LB         | 5371       | 994        | 34          | 7           |

SBDG. Analyzing exclusively the SBC, nearly 73% of the terms were also enriched in the full dataset for VLB x VHB. HB.LB, 50% for VHB x HB.LB and 75% for HB x LB. Also, the  number of enriched terms was high, even with fewer DEGs for the test. Some terms were exclusive for the high confidence set, such as zinc ion binding, proteolysis, and negative regulation of translation. The opposite also occurred, such as for kinase activity.

## Contribution of SBDG exclusive genotypes for differential expression

We compared the DEGs identified in the subgroup of genotypes absent in SBC with the data from SBC and SBDG, using the same parameters for the analysis ( Figure 5). It was possible to observe distinct patterns between the contrast VLB x VHB.HB.LB and the others, regarding the number of DEGs called by each approach. In the first contrast, the total number for SBDG was greater than for the exclusive set, as opposed to the results for the last two contrasts. We also highlight that the larger fraction of DEGs detected in SBDG concentrated in the intersection with the other approaches.

## Discussion

Analyzing the patterns found in the MDS plots, we can infer that transcriptional profiles agreed only partially with the phenotypic assortment of genotypes into four categories of  soluble  solids  content  ( Figure 1).  This  plot  also  shows a recurrent observation in the other analyses regarding the sharp disparities found between VLB and the other groups. This fact is evident in the separation of samples in Figure 1, the increased number of DEGs from the VLB x VHB.HB.LB tests, when compared to the other contrasts, and the functional enrichment from SBDG ( Figure 2). A  likely  explanation is  the  genetic background of the genotypes, because VLB comprises S. spontaneum accessions, while VHB, HB, and LB comprise S. officinarum and commercial hybrids. Despite having a genomic contribution from both parental species, commercial hybrids underwent backcrossing to S. officinarum to  enhance sugar yield, which makes them more alike to this species in terms of expression. Our result matches the clustering pattern found in the MDS plot for sugarcane leaf samples, in which S. spontaneum genotypes separate from the remaining (Correr et al., 2020). This interpretation also agrees with cytogenetic information from R570, because about 80% of  its  chromosomes presented similarity to S.  officinarum and 10% to S. spontaneum (D'Hont et al., 1996; Garsmeur et al., 2018). Another reasonable explanation for the observed disparity of VLB is the imbalance in chromosome numbers, which remains to be assessed by karyotyping. Changes in ploidy levels and aneuploidy can lead to systematic differences in phenotype and gene expression (Liqin et al., 2019; Johnson et al., 2020).

This assumption was reinforced by the SBDG contrasts, where VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB showed only a few DEGs. When considering the fraction of significant DEGs in common between strategies using the full dataset, the amount of shared significant tests was nearly constant over the three contrasts in SBDG (Figure 1). The same was not true for SBC, which had a rate of shared DEGs ranging from 2 to 32%. A feasible explanation is that sugarcane genotypes have high variability of expression among each other, and the use of clones provides enough statistical power to detect it. However, a substantial proportion of these genes might not be actually related to the  biological  phenomenon of interest, because the lower variability in the SBC led to the identification of DEGs with lower fold-change magnitudes. Extrapolating these results, we can suggest that the SBC was not fully representative of the groups of interest, because of the low agreement of DEGs identified in common with the SBDG.

Several of the identified enriched GO terms fit in molecular mechanisms with no explicit relationship to the accumulation of sugars or carbon partitioning. For instance, the  contrast  HB × LB in SBC, which represents a direct comparison of the genotypes R570 and F36-819, showed a significant enrichment of kinase activity, which may indeed represent an important mechanism that distinguishes the phenotypes of these plants. However, phosphorylation is a broad molecular mechanism of signal transduction, and it could be related to other processes other than sugar accumulation. Besides, the expression patterns of genes associated with protein phosphorylation were not consistent among the other

Figure 4 Enriched GO terms by strategy and contrast for the high confidence set of DEGs. This set contains genes with a significant test for differential expression in more than 95% of combinations of samples (p &lt; 0.01, after FDR adjustment).

<!-- image -->

genotypes. On the other hand, some of the terms found in the SBDG functional enrichment are coherent with observable phenotypic traits, e.g .,  recognition  of  pollen  and  cellulose biosynthetic process. Pollen recognition is a potentially vital activity for genotypes in the VLB group, because it is composed uniquely of wild accessions, which probably are prone to perform sexual reproduction without human assistance. Also, the discrepant levels of fiber in VLB × VHB.HB.LB groups corroborate the enrichment of cellulose biosynthetic activity. With the outcomes of functional enrichment for the high confidence set, we could recognize several GO terms in disagreement with the DEGs based on the full set. The terms discussed above such as pollen recognition, cellulose biosynthetic process, and kinase activity were not significant for these high confidence genes. These examples highlight the lack of similar expression patterns among all samples.

Besides the biological and residual sources of variation in  gene  expression quantitation, stochastic processes also contribute to the variance of RNA-Seq data, such as the random sampling of transcripts in library preparation. For SBDG, we could also consider that the genotypes in each group have different contributions to the differential expression result. More precisely, combining a diverse set of genotypes into an experimental group increases the overall variability of expression levels for most genes and modifies the average counts per group.

We presented a selection of four genotypes for the SBC, which is one particular choice among 81 (3 4 ) possible combinations if maintaining the same categories from the SBDG. Examining the wide distribution of genotypes in the MDS plot for SBDG ( Figure 1), we can presume that the choice of genotypes can lead to sharply discordant sets of DEGs. This

Figure 5 Differentially expressed genes shared by three sets of samples: SBC, SBDG, and SBDG-exclusive genotypes. The method for filtering genes with low expression was the same for the three sets, adopting a more permissive criterion due to the lower number of samples in the exclusive set (CPM &gt; 1 for at least two samples). We only considered the genes passing the low expression filtering criterion in all sets (38,420 genes). The diagrams represent contrasts VLB × HB.LB.VHB ( a ), VHB × HB.LB ( b ), and HB × LB ( c ). Correlation of log fold changes among the two strategies and the set of SBDG-exclusive samples, for contrast VLB × VHB.HB.LB ( d ). In the main diagonal, the histograms show how the distribution of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and non-DEGs, as a function of the log fold change (logFC). The classification of genes considered the result of differential expression for all pairwise groups of strategies (SBC, SBDG, and SBDG-exclusive genotypes). Pink points represent genes with a significant test for a given pair of groups, and gray points represent non-significant genes for the same pair.

<!-- image -->

is a result of the faulty coherence of genotypes inside the groups VHB, HB, and LB. Furthermore, the combination-sensitive set of identified DEGs could drive mistaken conclusions regarding the biological issue of interest. For example, a specific gene might be called differentially expressed due exclusively to the choice of sampled genotypes, instead of representing a general phenomenon for other genotypes with similar phenotypic characteristics. The outcomes of the analyses using subsets of samples reinforce this hypothesis ( Figure 3). We can observe an increasing number of genes with contradictory results of differential expression tests when compared to the full-data tests. This  fact  implies  that  simply  including  or  not  some genotypes may lead to changes in the list of DEGs. Another result  that  supports  the  caveats  on  genotype  choice  is  the number of DEGs for VHB x HB.LB and HB × LB contrasts (Figure 5). In the former contrast, the exclusive genotypes of the SBDG showed 625 DEGs that could only be found with these samples, versus 31 in SBDG. The difference was even more prominent for HB × LB. Notably, Criolla Rayada and IJ76-317 are S. officinarum accessions that integrate the LB group, both with a discrepant expression profile according to the MDS analysis. The simple inclusion of F36-819 in this group might have been enough to disrupt the homogeneity detected between the other two genotypes. These observations show how the lack of uniformity in the SBDG genotypes leads to a low number of significant DEGs. Moreover, they indicate that this uniformity may be sensible to the choice of genotypes to form the experimental groups.

The behavior of (mis)matches in the detection of DEGs (Figure S2, S3) can be helpful to illustrate some properties of each strategy. First, they illustrate the more robust response of the SBC regarding the removal of samples by the lower rate of mismatches. This fact reinforces that SBC showed increased statistical power to detect DEGs. Second, these results also suggest that individual samples can have a determinant role on the identification of differential expression for a considerable number of genes, mainly for the SBDG. As shown in Figure S3, the n i × n i grids did not reveal a uniform or linear distribution pattern of the power to detect differential expression. There were both rows and columns densely occupied by DEGs, in patterns contingent on the number of removed samples. They occurred in multiples of 25% for three samples and 33% for four, which correspond to the fractions of combinations without a specific sample. Figure S2 revealed a similar pattern, noticeable by the steep inclines of cumulative distributions for particular mismatch rates.

We suggested that the SBDG yielded fewer DEGs due to combining genotypes with more variable expression patterns than the SBC. Also, our interpretation of the results presented evidence towards the prevalence of more biologically meaningful DEGs for SBDG, instead of simply revealing genotype-specific profiles. However, a feasible criticism over these hypotheses is that using a collection of genotypes per phenotypic group could still lead to genotype-specific DEGs, but for more than one genotype at once. A necessary step to avoid this issue is to choose a diverse set of genotypes for the experimental groups, which should be unrelated and representative of the population of interest. For tackling this question, we performed the complete analysis procedure using the genotypes exclusive to the SBDG, such that we could assess the direct contribution of the genotypes shared with the SBC, the genotypes absent in SBC, and the intersection between them. Interestingly, this analysis showed that the intersection between SBC and the exclusive set concentrated most of the SBDG genes in all contrasts (from 37 to 48% of DEGs). This result agrees with the expectation of a shared set of genes among all 12 genotypes. Moreover, the correlations of logFC in VLB x VHB.HB.LB among the approaches revealed that SBDG had an intermediate pattern for differential expression between SBC and the exclusive set of samples ( Figure 5). Another important observation is that the increased number of samples for SBDG compared to the exclusive set of samples led to a larger number of DEGs in the first contrast and a smaller number in the other two. Thus, we can hypothesize that as the number of genotypes per group increased, the issue of detecting genotype-specific DEGs and genes with reduced biological meaning decreased.

Our results emphasize that sampling strategies are sources of bias in differential expression analysis. This conclusion draws special attention to vegetatively propagated species, as is the case of sugarcane, because many researchers opt to use clones as biological replicates. We suggest that the choice of replication strategy should be planned carefully. This recommendation joins previous guidelines for differential gene expression studies, such as the number of biological samples, library size, and sequencing design (Conesa et al., 2016; Lamarre et al., 2018).

With the increasing application of next-generation sequencing to investigate complex transcriptomes, such as that of sugarcane, recent studies aim to apply these techniques to  unravel  the  molecular  mechanisms controlling several phenotypic traits. However, a single biological replicate in each contrasting group is not enough for performing this sort of analysis, leaving to the researcher the choice of a suitable experimental design. Our study intended to illustrate the strengths and caveats inherent to two sampling strategies for biological replication, namely by using a diverse group of genotypes with common phenotypic characteristics or clones from the same genotype, chosen to be representative of this group. The results provided evidence of discrepancies in (i) quantitative terms, regarding the number of genes detected as differentially expressed, (ii) consistency, when subjected to self-validation using subsampling, and (iii) inferred biological conclusions from the functional annotation of differentially expressed genes. These analyses suggest that the use of clones as biological replicates may yield somewhat restricted results, biased by the particular choice of genotypes. Regardless of these concerns, the direct comparison of two genotypes can still be useful in particular situations. For instance, when there is no need to understand how a broad phenomenon occurs for a species, or when the aim is actually to uncover genotypespecific mechanisms. On the other hand, the presence of a representative set of genotypes within the same group can lead to more reasonable biological conclusions. In any case, it is possible to combine these strategies to refine the level of details, if economically viable. This research offers support for experimental design planning of new studies using differential expression as a method of investigation in sugarcane and other plants with high genomic complexity.

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development - CNPq (grant number 459162/2014-4) and by grant #2015/22993-7, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP). This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001. V.H.M. was the recipient of grant #2018/21345-0, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP), and a CNPq scholarship.

## Conflict of Interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions

VHM performed all data analyses and drafted the manuscript. ALBG, FHC, and GKH collected the samples and performed RNA extraction. MSC was responsible for the field experiment. GRAM and MSC conceived the experiment, supervised the data analysis, and corrected the manuscript.

## References

Aguilar NM, Arteaga-Cardona F, de Anda Reyes ME, GervacioArciniega JJ and Salazar-Kuri U (2019) Magnetic bioplastics based on isolated cellulose from cotton and sugarcane bagasse. Mater Chem Phys 238:121921.

- Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW and Lipman DJ (1990) Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol Biol 215:403-410.
- Barreto FZ, Rosa JRBF, Balsalobre TWA, Pastina MM, Silva RR, Hoffmann HP, de Souza AP, Garcia AAF and Carneiro MS (2019) A genome-wide association study identified loci for yield component traits in sugarcane (Saccharum spp.). PLoS One 14:e0219843.
- Benjamini Y and Hochberg Y (1995) Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J Roy Stat Soc B Met 57:289-300.
- Bolger AM, Lohse M and Usadel B (2014) Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30:21142120
- Bremer G (1925) The cytology of the sugarcane. Genetica 7:293-322.
- Casu  RE,  Jarmey  JM,  Bonnett  GD  and  Manners  JM  (2007) Identification  of  transcripts  associated  with  cell  wall metabolism and development in the stem of sugarcane by Affymetrix GeneChip Sugarcane Genome Array expression profiling. Funct Integr Genomic 7:153-167.
- Casu RE, Rae AL, Nielsen JM, Perroux JM, Bonnett GD and Manners JM (2015) Tissue-specific transcriptome analysis within the maturing sugarcane stalk reveals spatial regulation in the expression of cellulose synthase and sucrose transporter gene families. Plant Mol Biol 89:607-628.
- Conesa A, Madrigal P, Tarazona S, Gomez-Cabrero D, Cervera A, McPherson A, Szcześniak MW, Gaffney DJ, Elo LL, Zhang X et al . (2016) A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis. Genome Biol 17:13.
- Correr FH, Hosaka GK, Barreto FZ, Valadão IB, Balsalobre TWA, Furtado A, Henry RJ, Carneiro MS and Margarido GRA (2020) Differential  expression in leaves of Saccharum genotypes contrasting in biomass production provides evidence of genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC Genomics 21:673.
- Cursi DE, Hoffmann HP, Barbosa GVS, Bressiani JA, Gazaffi R, Chapola RG, Fernandes Junior AR, Balsalobre TWA, Diniz CA, Santos JM et al. (2022). History and current status of sugarcane breeding, germplasm development and molecular genetics in Brazil. Sugar Tech 24:112-133.
- de Souza Barbosa GV, Cruz MM, Soares L, Rocha AMC, Ribeiro CAG, Sousa AJR, Ferreira JLC, da Silva Barreto EJ, da Silva WCM and dos Santos AVP (2002) A brief report on sugarcane breeding program in Alagoas, Brazil. Crop Breed Appl Biot 2:613-616.
- Dharshini S, Chakravarthi M, Narayan JA, Manoj VM, Naveenarani M, Kumar R, Meena M, Ram B and Appunu C (2016) De novo sequencing and transcriptome analysis of a low temperature tolerant Saccharum  spontaneum clone  IND  00-1037.  J Biotechnol 231:280-29420.
- D'Hont A, Grivet L, Feldmann P, Glaszmann JC, Rao S and Berding N (1996) Characterisation of the double genome structure of modern sugarcane cultivars ( Saccharum spp.) by molecular cytogenetics. Mol Gen Genet 250:405-413.
- Eddy SR (2009) A new generation of homology search tools based on probabilistic inference. In: Genome Informatics 2009: Genome Inform. World Scientific, vol. 23, pp 205-211.
- Ferreira SS, Hotta CT, de Carli Poelking VG, Leite DCC, Buckeridge MS, Loureiro ME, Barbosa MHP, Carneiro MS and Souza GM (2016) Co-expression network analysis reveals transcription factors associated to cell wall biosynthesis in sugarcane. Plant Mol Biol 91:15-35.
- Garsmeur O, Droc G, Antonise R, Grimwood J, Potier B, Aitken K, Jenkins J, Martin G, Charron C, Hervouet C et al. (2018) A mosaic monoploid reference sequence for the highly complex genome of sugarcane. Nat Commun 9:2638.
- Goldemberg J (2008) The Brazilian biofuels industry. Biotechnol Biofuels 1:6.
- Grabherr MG, Haas BJ, Yassour M, Levin JZ, Thompson DA, Amit I,  Adiconis X, Fan L, Raychowdhury R, Zeng Q et al. (2011) Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome. Nat Biotechnol 29:644-652.
- Heinz  DJ  and  Tew  TL  (1987)  Hybridization  procedures.  In: Developments in crop science, Elsevier, vol. 11, pp 313-342.
- Hoang NV, Furtado A, O'Keeffe AJ, Botha FC and Henry RJ (2017) Association of gene expression with biomass content and composition in sugarcane. PloS One 12:e0183417.
- Irvine JE (1999) Saccharum species as horticultural classes. Theor Appl Genet 98:186-194.
- Jackson PA (2005) Breeding for improved sugar content in sugarcane. Field Crop Res 92:277-290.
- Johnson AF, Hou J, Yang H, Shi X, Chen C, Islam MS, Ji T, Cheng J and Birchler JA (2020) Magnitude of modulation of gene expression in aneuploid maize depends on the extent of genomic imbalance. J Genet Genomics 47:93-103.
- Lamarre S, Frasse P, Zouine M, Labourdette D, Sainderichin E, Hu G, Le Berre-Anton V, Bouzayen M and Maza E (2018) Optimization of an RNA-Seq differential gene expression analysis depending on biological replicate number and library size. Front Plant Sci 9:108.
- Liqin G, Jianguo Z, Xiaoxia L and Guodong R (2019) Polyploidyrelated differential gene expression between diploid and synthesized allotriploid and allotetraploid hybrids of Populus. Mol Breeding 39:69.
- Liu X, Li X, Liu H, Xu C, Lin X, Li C and Deng Z (2016) Phylogenetic analysis of different ploidy Saccharum spontaneum based on rDNA-ITS sequences. PLoS One 11:e0151524.
- Martin M (2011) Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from highthroughput sequencing reads. EMBnet J 17:10-12.
- Medeiros C, Balsalobre TWA and Carneiro MS (2020) Molecular diversity  and  genetic  structure  of Saccharum complex accessions. PLoS One 15:e0233211.
- Meng Z, Han J, Lin Y, Zhao Y, Lin Q, Ma X, Wang J, Zhang M, Zhang L, Yang Q et  al. (2020)  Characterization of a Saccharum spontaneum with a basic chromosome number of x= 10 provides new insights on genome evolution in genus Saccharum . Theor Appl Genet 133:187-199.
- Nawae W, Shearman JR, Tangphatsornruang S, Punpee P, Yoocha T, Sangsrakru D, Naktang C, Sonthirod C, Wirojsirasak W, Ukoskit K et  al. (2020) Differential expression between drought-tolerant and drought-sensitive sugarcane under mild and moderate water stress as revealed by a comparative analysis of leaf transcriptome. PeerJ 8:e9608.
- OECD/FAO (2020) OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2020-2029. OECD Publishing, Rome, 330 p.
- Panje RR and Babu CN (1960) Studies in Saccharum spontaneum distribution and geographical association of chromosome numbers. Cytologia 25:152-172.
- Papini-Terzi FS, Rocha FR, Vêncio RZN, Felix JM, Branco DS, Waclawovsky AJ, Del Bem LEV, Lembke CG, Costa MDL, Nishiyama MY et al. (2009) Sugarcane genes associated with sucrose content. BMC Genomics 10:120.
- Patro R, Duggal G, Love MI, Irizarry RA and Kingsford C (2017) Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nat Methods 14:417-419.
- Piperidis G, Piperidis N and D'Hont A (2010) Molecular cytogenetic investigation of chromosome composition and transmission in sugarcane. Mol Genet Genomics 284:65-73.
- Robinson MD and Oshlack A (2010) A scaling normalization method for differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biol 11:R25.
- Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ and Smyth GK (2010) edgeR: A Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26:139-140.

- Rody HVS, Bombardelli RGH, Creste S, Camargo LEA, Van Sluys MA and Monteiro-Vitorello CB (2019) Genome survey of resistance gene analogs in sugarcane: Genomic features and differential expression of the innate immune system from a smut-resistant genotype. BMC Genomics 20:809.

Selvi  A, Devi K, Manimekalai R and Prathima PT (2020) Comparative analysis of drought-responsive transcriptomes of sugarcane genotypes with differential tolerance to drought. 3 Biotech 10:236.

Simão FA, Waterhouse RM, Ioannidis P, Kriventseva EV and Zdobnov EM (2015) BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 31:3210-3212.

Souza GM, Van Sluys MA, Lembke CG, Lee H, Margarido GRA, Hotta CT, Gaiarsa JW, Diniz AL, Oliveira MdM, Ferreira SdS et al. (2019) Assembly of the 373k gene space of the polyploid sugarcane genome reveals reservoirs of functional diversity in the world's leading biomass crop. Gigascience 8:giz129.

- Thirugnanasambandam PP, Hoang NV, Furtado A, Botha FC and Henry RJ (2017) Association of variation in the sugarcane transcriptome with sugar content. BMC Genomics 18:909.

Vicentini R, Bottcher A, dos Santos Brito M, dos Santos AB, Creste S, de Andrade Landell MG, Cesarino I and Mazzafera P (2015) Large-scale transcriptome analysis of two sugarcane genotypes contrasting for lignin content. PLoS One 10:e0134909.

Young MD, Wakefield MJ, Smyth GK and Oshlack A (2010) Gene ontology analysis for RNA-seq: Accounting for selection bias. Genome Biol 11:R14.

## Supplementary material

The following online material is available for this article:

Table S1 - Processing of sequencing data.

Table S2 - Summary statistics of the de novo transcriptome assembly and its annotation with Gene Ontology terms.

Figure S1 - Number of genes kept after filtering out lowly expressed genes.

Figure S2 - Cumulative distribution of identified mismatches.

Figure S3 - Correspondence between differentially expressed genes found by SBC and SBDG per contrast and number of removed samples.

File S1 - Differential gene expression results.

File S2 - List of annotated genes in the transcriptome.

File S3 - Gene Ontology enrichment results.

File S4 - Gene Ontology enrichment for the high confidence set.

Associate Editor: Rogério Margis

License information: This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (type CC-BY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original article is properly cited.
MATERIALS
## Material and Methods

## Biological material and RNA-Seq

The genotypes chosen for this study are part of the Brazilian Panel of Sugarcane Genotypes, located in Araras Brazil. They were selected from 254 genotypes to represent elite lines and commercial hybrids used in Brazil, as well as ancestral species of the Saccharum complex (Medeiros et al., 2020). First, for the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), we selected 12 genotypes and separated them into four groups with three members each. This categorization divided genotypes based on their content of soluble solids, measured in ºBrix: VLB (Very Low ºBrix), LB (Low ºBrix), HB (High ºBrix), VHB (Very High ºBrix). The phenotypic characterization of this panel of genotypes, including the content of soluble solids, is described in Barreto et al. (2019). Next, for the strategy based on clones (SBC), we chose one representative of each group and used three clonal replicates of these genotypes to represent the corresponding phenotypic groups (Table 1).

Immature culms (internode +1) from all 24 plants were collected in June 2016, in Araras, followed by extraction of total RNA with the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. We prepared the RNASeq libraries of polyadenylated transcripts using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT (Illumina) protocol. These libraries were sequenced in a HiSeq 2500 equipment (Illumina), resulting in paired-end reads 2x100 bp long. The 12 libraries of the SBC were sequenced in three lanes, in combination with other samples not used in this study, with final sequencing depth corresponding to eight samples per lane. For the SBDG we used a single lane exclusively for the twelve samples.

Table 1 Genotypes selected to compose each ºBrix group for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and based on diverse genotypes (SBDG). In the former strategy, we sampled the immature internode +1 of three clonal replicates (R1, R2, and R3) for each genotype per group, and samples from three different genotypes per group for the latter. The genotypes IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 were represented in both strategies, using samples from different plants.

| Group   | Genotype          |   # of samples in SBC |   # of samples in SBDG | Soluble solids (ºBrix ± s.d.)   |
|---------|-------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|
|         | Krakatau          |                     0 |                      1 | 12.03 ± 2.02                    |
| VLB     | SES205A           |                     0 |                      1 | 13.99 ± 3.14                    |
|         | IN84-58           |                     3 |                      1 | 14.78 ± 1.89                    |
|         | Criolla Rayada    |                     0 |                      1 | 16.53 ± 1.37                    |
| LB      | IJ76-317          |                     0 |                      1 | 17.68 ± 1.75                    |
|         | F36-819           |                     3 |                      1 | 18.05 ± 1.51                    |
|         | White Transparent |                     0 |                      1 | 19.60 ± 2.01                    |
| HB      | RB92579           |                     0 |                      1 | 19.77 ± 1.29                    |
|         | R570              |                     3 |                      1 | 20.69 ± 1.24                    |
|         | White Mauritius   |                     0 |                      1 | 21.25 ± 1.38                    |
| VHB     | SP80-3280         |                     3 |                      1 | 21.29 ± 1.88                    |
|         | RB835486          |                     0 |                      1 | 21.85 ± 1.86                    |

## Impact of missing samples on differential expression results

In addition to using all samples of each strategy, we also analyzed the effect of systematically removing samples on the differential expression results. This procedure can provide a better understanding of the effect of individual samples on the downstream analysis, as well as establishing a comparison between this approach and the use of full data. We have developed a method to compare different combinations of subsets of samples, under the condition that valid combinations must have at least two samples per group. This restriction is necessary because minimal replication per group is required to properly calculate gene dispersions, even if the estimates are less accurate. Because there are four groups with three samples each, 255 combinations exist, all of which were individually tested for differential expression with the same contrasts previously designed. The number of combinations

of  different  numbers of removed samples is given by the binomial factor:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which k represents the number of samples per group ( k = 3 ), g represents the number of groups ( g = 4 ), and i represents the number of removed samples, ranging from one to four. For each combination, we removed genes with low expression levels (CPM &gt; 1 in less than two samples) and recorded the differential expression result as one of the following categories: (a) upregulated, (b) downregulated, (c) not significant, or (d) filtered out. One result was obtained for each gene, combination of samples, contrast and sampling strategy. We applied the same workflow for performing differential expression and functional enrichment tests as in the full data analyses.

Among all tested combinations of samples in our subsampling  evaluation,  one  of  special  interest  is  that composed of the eight genotypes present exclusively in SBDG. The strategy based on clones comprised a single genotype per group of soluble solids content, namely, IN84-58, F36-819, R570, and SP80-3280 (Table 1). For SBDG, we chose another eight genotypes in addition to these, which we call exclusive genotypes of SBDG, specifically SES205A, Krakatau, Criolla Rayada, IJ76-317, White Transparent, RB92579, White Mauritius, and RB835486. We also performed analyses of differential expression with this subset of samples.

## Assessment of strategies using subsets of samples

When  removing  a  fraction  of  samples  from  the experimental design, the average values of gene counts and variance are modified and less precise, such that the resulting set of DEGs may be different. For this reason, we adopted the strategy of systematically removing samples as a validating procedure of the expression results. Also, this approach evaluates the effect of variation on the number of samples per group, such as in unbalanced experiments, or missing samples. Handling mistakes, low volumes of biological material, difficulties in preparing the sequencing libraries, and other unexpected events often cause (random) loss of samples. Because each strategy includes 12 samples divided into four groups, and there must be at least two per group for estimating the dispersion parameter, we could jointly remove a maximum of four samples. These restrictions produced 255 combinations, which were individually tested for differential expression.

We observed that, as the number of removed samples changed from one to four, the more differential expression disagreed with the results obtained with the full dataset. Albeit at low rates, we could identify genes with an inverted result of

Figure 1 Gene expression patterns and differentially expressed genes for both sampling strategies. ( a ) Multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot showing pairwise distances between samples based on the most divergent genes for each pair. The panels represent the MDS plot for the strategy based on clones (SBC) and the strategy based on diverse genotypes (SBDG), respectively. ( b , c , d ) Mean-difference plot grid showing differentially expressed genes for all contrasts and strategies. Fold changes (logFC) and average expression levels in counts per million (logCPM) are shown in base 2 log scales. The rows indicate the three orthogonal contrasts, while the columns correspond to the strategies of sampling biological replicates. Colors represent the result of differential expression tests (p &lt; 0.05, after FDR correction for multiple tests). ( e , f , g ) Differentially expressed genes shared by the strategies based on clones and on diverse genotypes. The diagrams represent the number of genes detected as significantly differentially expressed in the contrasts. The strategy based on clones is in blue, while the strategy based on diverse genotypes is in green. The figures represent orthogonal contrasts VLB × HB.LB. VHB ( b , e ), VHB × HB.LB ( c , f ), and HB × LB ( d , g ).

Figure 2 Enriched gene ontology terms by strategy and contrast. There was no significant test result for HB × LB in the strategy based on diverse genotypes (p &lt; 0.01, after FDR adjustment). The numeric axis represents the number of differentially expressed genes for each particular gene ontology term.

differential expression, i.e. , miscalls of up or downregulation, which occurred from 10 -6 to 10 -5 % of genes for the SBC, and from 10 -5 to 10 -4  % for the SBDG. Using the original data results as a gold standard (full set of samples), the strategy based on clones showed a relatively lower percentage of false negatives and a higher percentage of false positives - green and purple curves in (Figure 3), respectively.

Because our systematic removal of samples provided a large number of differential expression tests for each gene, we could establish a high confidence set of DEGs - those with at least 95% of tests with the same results ( Table 2). We then used this high confidence set for performing a functional enrichment analysis (Figure 4, File S4). The enriched GO terms for the full set of DEGs and the high confidence set were essentially different. There were only three enriched terms for the SBDG, of which two had also been detected with the full dataset, and the other was only significant for the SBC. Given the low number of annotated and differentially expressed genes for the contrasts VHB × HB.LB and HB × LB, it was not possible to detect any enriched term for the

Figure 3 Effect of sample removal on the results of differential expression. The values represented by the continuous (SBC) and dashed (SBDG) curves are the averages of differential expression tests for all possible combinations and contrasts, as a function of the number of removed samples. The red curve indicates the concordant genes in the original and subsampled datasets; in yellow, the differentially expressed genes with inverted results, whether up or downregulated; in green, genes that were not significant due to subsampling; in blue, filtered genes after subsampling; and in purple, genes that appeared as spuriously differentially expressed with subsampling.

Table 2 The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the high confidence set. We identified these genes as differentially expressed in at least 95% of the subsampling combinations when removing from one to four samples in each strategy. We considered only the combinations which presented a minimum of two samples per experimental group. For each strategy, we show the total number of DEGs and those annotated with gene ontology terms.

|                 | SBC DEGs   | SBC DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   |
|-----------------|------------|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Contrast        | Total      | Annotated  | Total       | Annotated   |
| VLB × VHB.HB.LB | 14240      | 2688       | 2960        | 458         |
| VHB × HB.LB     | 5774       | 829        | 44          | 7           |
| HB × LB         | 5371       | 994        | 34          | 7           |

SBDG. Analyzing exclusively the SBC, nearly 73% of the terms were also enriched in the full dataset for VLB x VHB. HB.LB, 50% for VHB x HB.LB and 75% for HB x LB. Also, the  number of enriched terms was high, even with fewer DEGs for the test. Some terms were exclusive for the high confidence set, such as zinc ion binding, proteolysis, and negative regulation of translation. The opposite also occurred, such as for kinase activity.

## Supplementary material

The following online material is available for this article:

Table S1 - Processing of sequencing data.

Table S2 - Summary statistics of the de novo transcriptome assembly and its annotation with Gene Ontology terms.

Figure S1 - Number of genes kept after filtering out lowly expressed genes.

Figure S2 - Cumulative distribution of identified mismatches.

Figure S3 - Correspondence between differentially expressed genes found by SBC and SBDG per contrast and number of removed samples.

File S1 - Differential gene expression results.

File S2 - List of annotated genes in the transcriptome.

File S3 - Gene Ontology enrichment results.

File S4 - Gene Ontology enrichment for the high confidence set.

Associate Editor: Rogério Margis

License information: This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (type CC-BY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original article is properly cited.
DATA AVAILABILITY
## Comparison of differential expression results with the full dataset

For differential expression analyses, we initially excluded lowly expressed genes, by filtering out genes that did not show a CPM greater than one for at least three samples. We did this filtering individually for each strategy, resulting in different sets of filtered genes for SBC and SBDG. Next, the following steps were repeated with the same criteria for both strategies, using the edgeR package (Robinson et al., 2010). We normalized the gene counts with the trimmed mean of

M-values method (Robinson and Oshlack , 2010) and built MDS (Multidimensional scaling) plots using the top 2,000 genes with the greatest pairwise variation between samples.

For  statistical  tests  of  differential  expression,  we considered a model for gene counts parametrized as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for sample i in an experimental group, gene g , π g,i the fraction of gene counts per gene and sample, dispersion Φ g , libraries size N i , average counts µ g,i = N i π g,i , and variance Φ g = π g,i ( 1+π g,i Φ g ). The common dispersion is the squared Biological Coefficient of Variation (BCV), which considers the common dispersion from all genes. The use of a local regression of genewise dispersion provides an additional level of information for dispersion estimates for each gene. As a result, Φ g represents a compromise between the dispersion of counts for gene g and the borrowed genewise dispersion from genes with close average CPM.

3 2 We designed three orthogonal contrasts to test for differential expression for each gene, namely VLB × VHB. HB.LB, corresponding to the null hypothesis H 0 :π g,VLB = π g,VHB +  π g,HB +  π g,LB  , VHB × HB.LB  to H 0 :π g,VHB = π g,HB + π g,LB , and HB × LB to H 0 :π g,HB = π g,LB .   A likelihood  ratio test was performed for each combination of gene, contrast, and strategy to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), with p-values adjusted by the false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) at a 0.05 significance threshold.

Using the sets of DEGs and the annotated transcriptome, we performed functional enrichment analyses considering the frequency of Gene Ontology (GO) terms in the background reference and each set. Because the average gene length may vary among GO categories, care was taken to calculate effective gene lengths, based on the average length of genes in each sample weighted by their expression levels. We used the goseq package (Young et al., 2010) to perform the functional enrichment test for each represented GO term (p &lt; 0.01, after adjusting for multiple tests with the FDR approach).

## Code and data availability

All the scripts are available at the Github repository (github.com/victor-h14/BiologicalReplicates). The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB44302 for SBDG and PRJEB40481 for SBC.
| Group   | Genotype          |   # of samples in SBC |   # of samples in SBDG | Soluble solids (ºBrix ± s.d.)   |
|---------|-------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|
|         | Krakatau          |                     0 |                      1 | 12.03 ± 2.02                    |
| VLB     | SES205A           |                     0 |                      1 | 13.99 ± 3.14                    |
|         | IN84-58           |                     3 |                      1 | 14.78 ± 1.89                    |
|         | Criolla Rayada    |                     0 |                      1 | 16.53 ± 1.37                    |
| LB      | IJ76-317          |                     0 |                      1 | 17.68 ± 1.75                    |
|         | F36-819           |                     3 |                      1 | 18.05 ± 1.51                    |
|         | White Transparent |                     0 |                      1 | 19.60 ± 2.01                    |
| HB      | RB92579           |                     0 |                      1 | 19.77 ± 1.29                    |
|         | R570              |                     3 |                      1 | 20.69 ± 1.24                    |
|         | White Mauritius   |                     0 |                      1 | 21.25 ± 1.38                    |
| VHB     | SP80-3280         |                     3 |                      1 | 21.29 ± 1.88                    |
|         | RB835486          |                     0 |                      1 | 21.85 ± 1.86                    |

|                 | SBC DEGs   | SBC DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   | SBDG DEGs   |
|-----------------|------------|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Contrast        | Total      | Annotated  | Total       | Annotated   |
| VLB × VHB.HB.LB | 14240      | 2688       | 2960        | 458         |
| VHB × HB.LB     | 5774       | 829        | 44          | 7           |
| HB × LB         | 5371       | 994        | 34          | 7           |

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 16:58:56,275 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 16:58:56,278 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 16:58:56,278 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 16:58:56,278 - INFO - {"entries": [
    {
        "accession": "PRJEB44302",
        "accession_type": "BioProject",
        "organism": null,
        "genotype": "SBDG",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "data availability statement",
        "evidence_text": "The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB44302 for SBDG"
    },
    {
        "accession": "PRJEB40481",
        "accession_type": "BioProject",
        "organism": null,
        "genotype": "SBC",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "data availability statement",
        "evidence_text": "The raw RNASeq reads are available at the European Nucleotide Archive, with all the samples from the BioProjects PRJEB40481 for SBC"
    }
],
"notes": "No organism information was provided in the text. The genotypes mentioned (SBDG and SBC) seem to refer to the sampling strategies rather than specific genotypes of an organism."}
2025-10-28 16:58:56,278 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJNA787323/10.21203_rs.3.rs-1194932_v1.pdf

2025-10-28 16:58:56,283 - INFO - detected formats: [<InputFormat.PDF: 'pdf'>]
2025-10-28 16:58:56,288 - INFO - Going to convert document batch...
2025-10-28 16:58:56,288 - INFO - Initializing pipeline for StandardPdfPipeline with options hash 5f7f6517f72f4ee63b4977e857fdeb61
2025-10-28 16:58:56,288 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:58:57,846 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:58:58,777 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 16:58:59,146 - INFO - Processing document 10.21203_rs.3.rs-1194932_v1.pdf
2025-10-28 16:59:09,834 - INFO - Finished converting document 10.21203_rs.3.rs-1194932_v1.pdf in 13.55 sec.
2025-10-28 16:59:09,867 - WARNING - Parameter `strict_text` has been deprecated and will be ignored.
2025-10-28 16:59:09,876 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 16:59:09,880 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.21203_rs.3.rs-1194932_v1.pdf
2025-10-28 16:59:09,880 - INFO - Characters: 57373
2025-10-28 16:59:09,881 - INFO - Words (approx): 8042
2025-10-28 16:59:09,881 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 10454.6
2025-10-28 16:59:09,881 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 16:59:09,881 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 16:59:09,881 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        <!-- image -->

Preprints are preliminary reports that have not undergone peer review They should not be considered conclusive; used to inform clinical practice; or referenced by the media as validated information:

## Transcriptome and Metabolome Analyses Reveal an Insight of Chlorophyll, Photosynthesis, Metal Ion and Phenylpropanoids Related Pathways in Sugarcane Ratoon Chlorosis

## Ting Luo

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Zhongfeng Zhou

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Yuchi Deng

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Yegeng Fan

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Lihang Qiu

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Rongfa Chen

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Haifeng Yan

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Huiwen Zhou

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Jianming Wu  (  wujianming2004@126.com )

Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences

## Qi Chen

New Technology Enterpreneur Center, Nanning

## Research Article

Keywords: Ratoon sugarcane chlorosis, chlorophyll metabolism, photosynthesis, metal ion metabolism, phenylpropanoids biosynthesis

Posted Date: December 28th, 2021

DOI: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1194932/v1

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

License:   This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.   Read Full

License

## Abstract

## Background

Ratoon sugarcane (Saccharum ocinarum) is susceptible to chlorosis, signicantly reducing production. The molecular mechanism underlying this phenomenon remains unknown. We analyzed the transcriptome and metabolome of chlorotic and non-chlorotic sugarcane leaves from the same eld to gain insight into the symptom.

## Results

The agronomic traits, like plant height, leaf number, stalk nod number, and tiller number, declined in chlorotic sugarcane. The chlorophyll content in chlorosis leaves was signicantly lower than non-chlorotic leaves. A total of 11,776 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were discovered in transcriptome analysis. In the KEGG enriched chlorophyll metabolism pathway, sixteen DEGs were found, eleven of which were down-regulated. Two photosynthesis pathways were also enriched, with 32 genes downregulated and four genes upregulated. Among the 81 enriched GO biological processes, there were four categories related to metal ion homeostasis and three related to metal ion transport. Approximately 400 metabolites were identied in metabolome analysis. The thirteen classied differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) were found all down-regulated. The phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was enriched in DEGs and DEMs, indicating phenylpropanoids' vital role in chlorosis.

## Conclusions

According to our study, chlorophyll production, metal ion metabolism, photosynthesis, and some secondary metabolites of the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway, were considerably altered in chlorotic ratoon sugarcane. Our nding revealed the relation between chlorosis and these pathways, which would further the understanding of the mechanism of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis.

## Introduction

Sugarcane (Saccharum ocinarum) is an essential crop in economic and food safety. In China, sugarcane accounts for 90% of sugar production, contributing 6 to 8 billion RMB [1]. In Guangxi, the leading sugarproducing province in China, ratoon sugarcane accounted for 60-70% of the total planting area [2]. Ratooning has some advantages, such as cost-reducing, labor-saving, and early ripening. However, ratooning planting faced various problems. Plantlet chlorosis is one of the problems confronting the Guangxi farmer. Approximately 40% of the sugarcane cultivated area appearing chlorosis in Guangxi, causing production reduction at about 23-40% [2, 3].

Green pigment is determined by the chlorophyll content, which comprises chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b molecules [4]. In plants, leaf chlorosis is due to lacking chlorophyll. Chlorophyll metabolism involves a series of enzymes, including HemA, HemB, chlH, chlM, por, and NOL [5]. Iron deciency triggered chlorophyll synthesis disorder, which leads to chlorosis in Areca catechu [6]. Genes related to chlorophyll metabolism were found with low expression levels in light green cucumber [7]. Chlorophyll is the primary pigment that absorbs light energy in photosynthesis reactions [8, 9]. Low chlorophyll content in chlorosis leaf decreases the photosynthetic rate and

fresh weight [6, 10]. Chlorophyll biosynthesis plays a vital role in maintaining photosynthetic machinery [11, 12]. Iron is an essential micronutrient in the synthesis of chlorophyll [13]. The lack of iron is one of the most common reasons for chlorosis [14]. However, studies suggested that even the chlorosis symptoms in Guangxi were similar to iron(Fe) chlorosis found in India, the triggering factors remained different[15-17]. Excessive Manganese(Mn) had been found in ratoon sugarcane chlorotic plantlets to block the uptake of active iron(Fe), which inhibited chlorophyll biosynthesis[2, 3]. Not just the content of iron or other metals, metal ion homeostasis and transportation would also impact the function of chloroplasts and photosynthesis[18]. Even in the same eld, the chlorosis symptoms mainly occurred in ratoon sugarcane plantlets. The cause of chlorosis in ratoon sugarcane plantlet maybe not only the eld condition. Understanding how sugarcane plantlet changes in these pathways provide a new perspective of reducing sugarcane ratoon chlorosis.

The advance of technologies in -omics enables a comprehensive approach to identify the mechanism underlying plant disease[19]. Transcriptome analysis provides a comprehensive genes expression prole of a particular phenotype, while metabolome analyzes the changes in metabolites involved in corresponding pathways [20, 21]. In chlorophyll metabolism or other metabolisms pathways, genes interact with metabolites in a comprehensive and complicated way [7, 20]. Comparative proteomics analysis revealed proteins involved in photosynthesis, drought-responsive, and jasmonic acid biosynthesis associated with ratoon sugarcane chlorosis symptoms [17]. Due to post-transcriptional processes, the correlation between transcriptome and proteome could be low [22]. Given this situation, exploring the mechanism under ratoon sugarcane chlorosis using transcriptomic and metabolomics analysis is still needed.

Our study aimed to depict the global response of sugarcane to ratoon chlorosis. Transcriptome and metabolome were used to explore how genes and metabolites changes correlate with chlorosis. Genes or metabolites related to chlorophyll metabolism, photosynthesis, metal ion homeostasis, and phenylopropanoid biosynthesis were analyzed. The nding of this work will provide a perspective of mechanisms of chlorosis occurring in ratoon sugarcane.

## Materials And Methods

## Plant materials condition and chlorophyll content determination

GuiTang49 (GT49) was the sugarcane cultivar employed in this study, which was a cross progeny of ROC 22 and Ganzhe 14. GT49 was developed by Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China [23]. The sugarcane eld was located in Fusui, Chongzuo, Guangxi, China. The sugarcanes used in this research were rst planted on February 22, 2019. The canes were harvested on January 31, 2021, leaving the remained stubbles to grow. From the date ratoon sugarcane rst displayed the chlorotic symptom, a survey of plantlet height, leaf number, stalk number, and tiller number was conducted every ten days. On April 18, 2021, the rst expanded leaves(+1 leaves) of chlorosis (chlorosis group) and non-chlorosis (control group) plantlets were collected randomly for further experiments.

The chlorosis samples were conrmed using the SPAD chlorophyll meter (Konica Minolta, Japan) with a reading less than 10. In contrast, the planted sugarcanes with a reading higher than 40 were grouped as control samples. Approximately 0.1g of leaves were rinsed and ground. The chlorophyll was extracted with 80% acetone

for 24h in dark. The content of chlorophyll was determined using the spectrophotometric method according to Arnon [24].

## Transcriptome analysis

Five leaves were included in one sample. Each group contained ve samples (5 replicates). The total RNA was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen, USA)according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA quality was assessed by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, USA) and agarose gel electrophoresis. The mRNA, enriched by Oligo(dT) beads, was fragmented and reverse transcripted into cDNA rst-strand with random primers. After synthesizing second-strand cDNA, the total cDNA was puried with a QiaQuick PCR extraction kit (Qiagen, The Netherlands). Sequencing adapters were ligated to the cDNA. Size selection and PCR amplication were performed before sequencing. The sequencing was operated using Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, USA).

Reads obtained from the sequencer were ltered before assembly using fastp [25]. Due to the lack of a sugarcane reference genome, the high-quality clean reads were processed to de novo assemble using the Trinity method [26]. The completeness of assembly was assessed with BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs) [27]. Gene expression level was calculated using FPKM (fragments per kilobase per million reads)method with StringTie software [28]. Analyzing by DESeq software[29], genes with fold change ≥ 2 and pvalue ≤ 0.05 were considered as DEGs (differential expressed genes). GO (gene ontology) and KEGG (Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes ) enrichment analysis were performed to depict the gene function and biological pathway of DEGs [30, 31].

## Metabolome analysis

The samples for metabolome analysis were selected for transcriptome. The leaves were ground using a mixer mill (MM 400, Retsch). 100 mg of powder was extracted overnight with 1.0 ml of aqueous methanol containing 0.1 mg/L lidocaine as internal standard. The supernatant was obtained by centrifugation and ltration. The metabolite compounds were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS system (QTRAP 6500, Sciex, USA). The chromatographic separations were performed using a Waters ACQUITY C18 column (2.1 mm * 100 mm, 18 µm, Waters, USA) under a ow rate of 0.4 ml/min at 40°C. The mobile phase was water (0.04% acetic acid) as Phase A and acidied acetonitrile (0.04% acetic acid) as Phase B. The separation was run in a gradient condition: 95:5 Phase A/Phase B for the rst 10 min, 5:95 Phase A/Phase B for the 11th to 12th min, 95:5 Phase A/Phase B for the 13th to 15th min. The euent was detected with Sciex Triple Quad 6500 mass spectrometer (Sciex, USA) in a positive ion mode. The quantication of metabolites was performed according to multiple reaction monitoring methods [32]. Analyst 1.6.1 software was applied for data ltering, peak detection, alignment, and calculation. Metabolites were identied by searching internal and public databases (MassBank, KNApSAcK, HMDB, MoTo DB, and METLIN) with the m/z values, retention times, and fragment patterns. Metabolites with thresholds of variable importance in projection (VIP) ≥ 1 and p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered to be signicantly different between the chlorosis and control groups [33].

## qRT-PCR validation

The total RNA was digested by DNase, and reverse-transcribed into cDNA for qRT-PCR using PrimeScript RT reagent kit (TAKARA, Dalian, China). The ACAD gene was used as a reference gene to normalize the relative expression level [34]. The qRT-PCR process was performed on qTOWER Real-Time Thermal Cyclers (Analytik

Jena, Germany). The relative expression rate was calculated with the -2ΔΔCT method [35]. All the primers of the validation gene were listed (Table S1).

## Results

Phenotype analysis of chlorosis ratoon and planted sugarcane plantlet

The ratoon plantlets would display distinct chlorosis symptoms, even in the same eld, comparing with the planted cane plantlets (Figure 1A). The SPAD chlorophyll meter reading of the plantlet leaves showed that the chlorosis and planted plantlets were signicantly different (Figure 1B and 1C). To monitor the growth development of the ratoon plantlet, we measured some agronomic traits. The plantlet shown chlorosis symptom grew slower than planted cane in plant height (Figure 2A), leaf (Figure 2B), stalk nod (Figure 2C), and tiller (Figure 2D).

## Global overview of sugarcane leaf transcriptome with chlorosis symptom

Since the ratoon sugarcane chlorosis is displayed mainly in the leaf, we hypothesized the changes in leaf transcriptome might correlate with the symptom. Furthermore, it may correlate with rhizosphere microbiota. Using the same plantlets, we extracted the total RNA from the ten samples. A total of 621,045,632 reads were generated using Illumina HiSeq 4000. Due to lack of reference genome, 88.339 unigenes were de novo assembled using Trinity software. The average length of all the unigenes was 903 bp. To assess De novo assembled unigenes' completeness, we took a quantitative measure with BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs). The results showed the percentage of conserved orthologues of plants represented in our assembled sugarcane transcriptome. Completeness of all the unigenes resulted in a high rate of complete plant orthologues (75%). Of the 1,440 orthologues searched in the BUSCO set of plants, 75% was complete, with the number of 1,080. Of the 1,080 complete BUSCO orthologues, 1,060 were single-copy, while the other 20 orthologues were duplicated. The proportion of fragmented and missing BUSCOs was 14% and 11%, respectively (Figure 3A). To annotate and classify the assembled unigenes, we employed four public protein databases to BLASTX the deduced peptides sequence of the unigenes, resulting in 48,816 unigenes were annotated (Table S2). Of all the annotated unigenes, 48, 275 (98.9%) unigenes showed a particular hit within the Nr database (Non-redundant protein sequence database). Among them, proteins were mainly from Zea mays, Setaria italica, and Oryza sativa Japonica. 5,745 unigenes only match the Nr database, while KEGG, Swissprot, and COG had 218, 176, and 35 unigenes, which were single matched, respectively (Figure 3B). A total of 17,756 unigenes were found in all four databases. All the Nr hit genes were from 479 species. Of all the hits, 17,691 (36.65%) were signicantly similar to proteins of Zea mays, and 7,406 (15.34%) and 5,484 (11.36%) were from Setaria italica and Oryza sativa Japonica Group, respectively (Figure 3C). According to some criteria (log2 foldchange &gt; 1, p-value ≤ 0.05), we identied a total of 11,776 differentially expressed genes (DEG) between chlorosis and control groups (Figure 3D).

## Function analysis of DEGs in Chlorosis sugarcane

Gene ontology (GO) analysis was employed to emphasize the function of DEGs. GO enrichment analysis revealed that DEGs were most enriched in GO cell component categories of membrane, thylakoid and intrinsic

component of membrane (Figure 4A, Table S3). In molecular function categories, tetrapyrrole binding, cellulose synthase activity and catalytic activity were the most enriched terms (Figure 4B, Table S3). For the biological processes, glucan metabolic process (GO:0044042), cellular metal ion homeostasis (GO:0006875) and cellular transition metal ion homeostasis (GO:0046916) exhibited the highest association with DEGs of the chlorosis symptom (Figure4C, Table S3). To map the metabolic pathways of DEGs, we annotated these genes using KEGG analysis. A total of 31 pathways were signicantly enriched from all the DEGs (Table S4). Among them, 27 pathways were related to metabolism, while two environmental information processing pathways and two organismal systems pathways were observed. Biosynthesis of secondary metabolisms, Metabolic pathways and plant-pathogen interaction were the top three enriched pathways (Figure 4D).

## The changes of genes related to chlorophyll metabolism in chlorosis sugarcane

The KEGG analysis indicated that DEGs involved in the chlorophyll metabolism pathway were enriched (p-value = 0.0224, Table S5). To further investigate this pathway, we found that sixteen genes were differently expressed in the chlorosis group compared to the control group, including eleven down-regulated genes and ve upregulated genes (Figure 5A). The down-regulated genes encode enzymes covered almost the whole process of chlorophyll biosynthesis, including glutamyl - tRNA reductase (hemA, EC: 1.2.1.70), coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (hemF, EC: 1.3.3.3), protoporphyrinogen/coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (hemY, EC: 1.3.3.4), magnesium chelatase subunit H (chlH, EC: 6.6.1.1), Mg - protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester cyclase (chlE, EC: 1.14.13.81), protochlorophyllide reductase (por, EC: 1.3.1.33) and chlorophyll b reductase (NOL, EC: 1.1.1.294). The upregulated genes encode uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (hemE, EC: 4.1.1.37), chlorophyllase (EC: 3.1.1.14) and chlorophyll a synthase (chlG, EC: 2.5.1.62). Also, the content of chlorophyll in chlorosis samples (average 0.40 mg/g) was signicantly lower than control samples (3.03 mg/g) (Figure 5B). The gene expression pattern in the chlorophyll metabolism pathway, in which down-regulated expression DEGs was the majority, was consistent with the reduction of chlorophyll content in chlorosis samples.

## The affection of photosynthesis in chlorosis ratoon sugarcane

Chlorophyll is the primary pigment to capture light energy. Considering the lack of chlorophyll in the chlorosis group, we noticed that two photosynthesis pathways, including photosynthesis-antenna proteins and photosynthesis, were also enriched by KEGG analysis (Table S6). There were 36 DEGs related to KEGG photosynthesis pathways, including nine genes related to photosystem I (PSI), seven related to photosystem II (PSII), one related to cytochrome b6/f complex, three related to photosynthetic electron transport, two related to F-type ATPase, ve related to light-harvesting chlorophyll protein complex I (LHCI) and nine related to LHCII (Figure 6A and B). Additionally, 32 genes, among the 36 DEGs of photosynthesis pathways, were signicantly down-regulated in the chlorosis group, while only four genes showed up-regulated expression patterns (Figure 6C).

## Metal ion homeostasis and transport processes respond under chlorosis ratoon sugarcane

Among the 81 enriched GO biological processes, there were four categories related to metal ion homeostasis and three categories related to metal ion transport (Figure 7A, Table S7). In the four categories related to metal ion homeostasis, including cellular metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0006875), cellular transition metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0046916), transition metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0055076) and metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0055065), there were 10 DEGs of six down- and four up-regulated. Of the three metal ion transport processes, 31 DEGs were found with 15 down-regulated and 16 up-regulated genes (Figure 7B). Homeostasis and transport processes shared seven genes in common, which were two FER1 (unigene0002936, unigene0029675), Unidentied gene(unigene0019302), NHX2 (unigene0040569), DTX42(unigene0056614), HMA1(unigene0064621) and HCC1(unigene0083098). Three genes, including TMN6 (unigene0036726), YS1(unigene0055240) and IRO2(unigene0085997), were only found in processes related to metal ion homeostasis.

## Metabolome analysis of the changes in chlorosis sugarcane

To disclose the differences of metabolites in ratoon chlorosis sugarcane, we performed metabolome analysis using LC-ESI-MS/MS system. A total of 498 compounds were identied and quantied (Table S8). Thirteen compounds with VIP value ≥ 1 and p-value &lt; 0.05 were classied as signicantly differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) between the chlorosis and control groups. All these metabolites, including six phenolic acids, three lipids, one alkaloid, one organic acid and one other compound, were down-regulated in the chlorosis group (Table 1). Among them, the compound with the greatest variation in content was coniferyl alcohol with a fold change of -2.9. KEGG pathway analysis demonstrated that the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was the most and only enriched pathway among the different metabolites (p-value = 0.0088). Three compounds belonged to the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, including Coniferyl alcohol, Ferulic acid and 5-OCaffeoylshikimic acid.

Table 1 Differentially expressed metabolites between chlorosis and control groups

| Class          | Compounds                           |        Chlorosis |   Control |    VIP* |    p-value |   Log2_Fold change |
|----------------|-------------------------------------|------------------|-----------|---------|------------|--------------------|
| Alkaloids      | p- Hydroxymandelonitrile            | 430394           |    608420 | 1.1096  | 0.0202738  |          -0.49941  |
| Lipids         | Octadeca- 11E,13E,15Z-trienoic acid |      3.8442e+06  |   4741460 | 2.56436 | 0.00846175 |          -0.302648 |
| Lipids         | Eicosadienoic acid                  | 461728           |    577134 | 1.01769 | 0.00513142 |          -0.321863 |
| Lipids         | LysoPC 16:0                         |      4.33572e+06 |   6566380 | 4.19557 | 0.0343621  |          -0.598827 |
| Organic acids  | 2-Hydroxycinnamic acid*             | 319370           |    545734 | 1.15424 | 0.0231017  |          -0.772969 |
| Others         | (S)-2-Phenyloxirane                 | 896878           |   1115572 | 1.19134 | 0.0295079  |          -0.3148   |
| Phenolic acids | Phthalic anhydride                  | 710886           |    857740 | 1.05579 | 0.0213815  |          -0.270922 |
| Phenolic acids | Vanillin*                           |      1.56294e+06 |   1941380 | 1.53827 | 0.00423727 |          -0.31282  |
| Phenolic acids | 2- (Formylamino)benzoic acid        | 506076           |    742464 | 1.12174 | 0.00254916 |          -0.552967 |
| Phenolic acids | Coniferyl alcohol                   |  79553           |    231474 | 1.08262 | 0.00357173 |          -1.54086  |
| Phenolic acids | Ferulic acid                        | 285570           |    545394 | 1.34645 | 0.0128134  |          -0.933454 |
| Phenolic acids | Dibutyl phthalate*                  |      1.36614e+07 |  16021600 | 4.31622 | 0.0236722  |          -0.229913 |
| Phenolic acids | 5-O-Caffeoylshikimic acid           | 207131           |    406682 | 1.18068 | 0.0134125  |          -0.973356 |

* VIP: variable importance in projection

## The correlation of transcriptome and metabolome in phenylopropanoid biosynthesis

To understand the changes of chlorosis in ratoon sugarcane, we further analyzed the correlation between metabolome and transcriptome. The only enriched pathway in differentially expressed metabolites, the phenylopropanoid biosynthesis pathway, was the fth enriched pathway in DEGs of the transcriptome. A total of 92 genes were involved with the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway among the 11,776 DEGs, while three out of 13 differential metabolites belonged to this pathway. The majority of the 92 genes, which including 62 genes, were down-regulated (Figure 8, Table S9). In our transcriptome, the POD gene, encoded a peroxidase, was identied expressed by 31 DEGs with 23 down-regulated and 8 up-regulated. Also, DEGs encoded HCT, PTAL, C3H, CCR, F5H, BGLU were mainly down-regulated in the chlorosis group. In contrast, we observed more upregulated genes in CAD and 4CL. The down-regulated of the two essential genes (PTAL and C3H) could largely explain the low accumulation of the two metabolites, Ferulic acid and 5-O-Caffeoylshikimic acid (Table 1).

Furthermore, the low accumulation of coniferyl-alcohol and down-regulation of POD and F5H indicated that the lignin biosynthesis would be impaired.

## qRT-PCR analysis

To validate the DEGs expression pattern, we randomly selected 20 genes, including up-and down-regulated, high and low expression rate, for quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR assays. The primary expression trend of the 20 genes was consistent (Figure 9A). The value of transcriptome and qRT-PCR showed a signicant positive correlation with the Pearson r-value of 0.9867. The linear regression of correlation analysis was conducted, resulting in the goodness of t with an R square value of 0.9513 (Figure 9B). These results indicated that the transcriptome was reliable.

## Discussion

Ratooning was an ancient, low-cost, and simple cultivation method in sugarcane production [36]. Ratoon sugarcane chlorosis is still a severe problem, caused massive loss in China [3, 17]. The main reason for ratoon sugarcane chlorosis was the imbalance between Fe and Mn concentration, which may induce by acidic soil, intense leaching, and continuous cultivation [2, 3]. Although causes and treatments have been studied previously, the associated regulatory mechanisms of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis still need further investigations. In this study, RNA-Seq was employed to demonstrate the global transcriptomic changes of ratoon sugarcane with chlorosis symptoms. DEGs related to chlorophyll metabolism, photosynthesis, and metal ion homeostasis were found a signicant difference in expression level. In addition, combining metabolome analysis, DEGs and DEMs were enriched in the phenylopropanoid biosynthesis pathway.

In Guangxi, China, the ratoon sugarcane emerged the high possibility of chlorosis symptom that contained a low concentration of chlorophyll (Figure 1A and 5B) [3]. Chlorophyll is the primary source of pigment in plant leaves, which is correlated with the green color [4]. The well-studied chlorophyll synthesis pathway involved many essential genes [5, 37]. HemA, which catalyzes the glutamy-tRNA to L-Glutamate 1-semialdehyde, is the initial enzyme of chlorophyll synthesis that regulates the chlorophyll accumulation during de-etiolation [38]. HemY catalyzes the protoporphyrinogen-IX to protoporphyrin-IX, which is predominant in chlorophyll synthesis [39]. The magnesium chelatases subunit H, named chlH, catalyzes the magnesium ion and protoporphyrin-IX to form Mg-protoporphyrin-IX, which was found induced by light [40]. Knock-down of chlE, an Mg-protoporphyrin-IX monomehyl ester cyclase, resulted in retarded growth and chloroplast developmental defects in Arabidopsis [41]. The protochlorophyllide reductase (por), the enzyme that promotes a photoreduction of protochlorophyllide to chlorophyllide, plays a vital role in the greening stage [42]. NOL, a chlorophyll b reductase, plays a role in chlorophyll b degradation [43]. In this study, twelve down-regulated DEGs, including three hemA, one hemF, two hemY, two chlH, one chlE, two por, and one NOL, were found in the chlorophyll synthesis pathway (Figure 5). Compared to the four up-regulated DEGs, including one hemF, one hemE, one chlG, and one CLH, the downregulated genes in this pathway were in the majority. The same phenomenon was observed in yellow leaf common wheat and light green cucumber [7, 44]. These results indicated the direct relation between ratoon sugarcane chlorosis and the dysfunction of chlorophyll synthesis.

Leaf photosynthesis is positively correlated with chlorophyll content [45]. In A. thaliana, photosynthetic eciency reduction was accompanied by a decrease in chlorophyll content [46]. In yellow leaf common wheat,

ve genes encoded proteins of the photosynthesis system were signicantly down-regulated [44]. Transcriptome and proteome analysis of a wheat mutant with albino leaves shown that the expression levels of both genes and proteins related to photosynthesis were lower than wild-type green wheat [47]. Likewise, we observed similar results in this study. There were 36 DEGs found in photosynthesis pathway, of which 32 were down-regulated (Figure 6). The light-harvesting chlorophyll protein complexes (LHC) binds chlorophyll to function in the photosynthesis system [48]. Lack of the LHC would affect plants' photosynthetic rate and growth [49]. In chlorosis sugarcane, we found that all the DEGs of LHC were down-regulated (Figure 6), suggesting that the formation of photosynthesis's antenna proteins would be affected. Photosynthesis mainly occurs in the chloroplast, which is related to the green color of plants. Chloroplast comprises chloroplast membrane, thylakoid, and matrix. The multi subunits complexes, including PSI, PSII, cytochrome b6/f complex, and photosynthetic electron transport, are embedded in the thylakoid membrane [50]. DEGs of these complexes were signicantly repressed in chlorosis sugarcane (Figure 6). The GO enrichment analysis of cellular components shown that ve GO terms, including thylakoid, thylakoid part, photosystem, photosynthetic membrane, and plastid thylakoid, were among the top 10 enriched terms (Figure 4A). These results agreed with previous reports, which revealed the yellow leaf mutant of common wheat caused abnormal chloroplast development [51].

Studies of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis in Guangxi suggested the excessive Mn accumulation in parent stalks was the main reason for chlorosis. At the same time, the active Fe deciency in plantlets played a secondary role [3]. The subsequent investigation revealed that, in the progression of the greening of chlorotic seedling, the leaf Mn content decreased signicantly, whereas Fe content increased [52]. These results remind us that the metal ion metabolism may exist disorder in chlorosis sugarcane. Our GO analysis has shown that seven categories related to metal ion homeostasis and transport were signicantly enriched (Figure 7A). A total of 34 DEGs were found in these categories (Figure 7B). Iron-phytosiderophore transporter (YS1) and transcription factor bHLH100 (IRO2) and were up-regulated by iron deciency [53, 54]. Ferritin 1 (FER1), important for iron homeostasis, stores iron in a soluble form, is up-regulated by iron overload treatment[55]. In our study, two genes, YS1(unigene0055240) and IRO2(unigene0085997), shown a signicantly increase with log2 FC higher than 8, while FER1 (unigene0002936, unigene0029675) were down-regulated with log2 FC lower than -6 (Table S7). These results indicated that the differential regulation of metal ion metabolism genes agreed with iron deciency. However, Does iron deciency induce genes differential changes? Or do the differentially expressed genes lead to iron deciency in the leaf? This situation still needs further investigation.

In a previous study, the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was enriched in both transcriptome and metabolome analysis of chlorosis A. catechu L. [6]. Combining metabolome analysis, we found 62 DEGs and 3 DEMs (differentially expressed metabolites) belong to the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway (Figure 8, Table S9, and Table 1). Interestingly, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis was the only enriched pathway in DEMs. These results indicated that phenylpropanoid biosynthesis is involved in ratoon sugarcane chlorosis development. Phenylpropanoids contribute signicantly to plants' response towards biotic and abiotic stimuli [56]. In chlorotic tea leaves, genes and metabolites related to phenylpropanoids biosynthesis showed lower expression levels than green leaf [57]. In an iron deciency chlorosis tolerant soybean, genes in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were up-regulated in low Fe condition [58]. Synthesis of coumarins is part of Fe acquisition machinery in Arabidopsis [59]. We noticed the BGLU, a beta-glucosidase coding gene, was downregulated in chlorosis sugarcane (Figure 8). This result suggests that the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis was altered at the transcripts and metabolites level in chlorotic ratoon sugarcane. Given the central role of

phenylpropanoid biosynthesis in metabolites pool [56, 60], two secondary metabolites pathways, including avonoids and phenylalanine, were found enriched in KEGG analysis (Figure 4D, Table S4).

## Conclusions

This study has investigated the changes in transcriptome and metabolome between chlorotic and non-chlorotic sugarcane leaves. Our results provided an insight into chlorophyll synthesis, photosynthesis, metal ion metabolism, and phenylpropanoids biosynthesis in ratoon chlorosis sugarcane. Genes regulation dysfunction in metal ion homeostasis and transportation likely leads to Mn toxicity and Fe deciency, which may cause ratoon chlorosis in sugarcane [3]. The reduction of chlorophyll content is likely due to the global gene expression decrease of the chlorophyll synthesis pathway. Furthermore, the photosynthesis pathway was affected signicantly. The consistent results of metabolome and transcriptome in phenylpropanoids biosynthesis pathway suggests that the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites plays a vital role in ratoon sugarcane chlorosis.

## Declarations

Conict of Interest

The authors declared that this study was conducted in the absence of any commercial or nancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conict of interest.

## Author Contributions

TL, ZZ, DY, YF, LQ, RC, HY, HZ, and JW conceived and designed the experiments. TL, ZZ, and  DY collected the samples. TL, YF, LQ, and QC performed the transcriptome sequencing and data analysis. TL, RC, HY, and HZ contributed equally to the metabolome analysis. TL wrote the paper. JW supervised this project.

## Funding

This research was supported by grants from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 32001484), Chines Academy of Science and Technology Service Network Planning (No. KFJ-STS-QYZD-199-2 ), Natural Science Foundation of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (No. 2019GXNSFBA245005), and Innovation Team Project for Modern Agricultural Industrial Technology System of Guangxi (No. nycytxgxcxtd-2021-03).

Availablity of data and materials

The raw reads generated in this study have been deposited in BioProject with the accession number of PRJNA787323 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA787323).

## References

1.             Zhang M, Govindaraju M: Sugarcane production in China. Sugarcane-technology and research 2018, 49.

2.             Chen G-F, Liu Z, Huang Y-Y, Xiong L-M, Tan Y-M, Xing Y, Tang Q-Z: Factors responsible for sugarcane ratoon chlorosis in acid soil and its management in Guangxi province of China. Sugar Tech 2016, 18(5):500504.
3.             Huang YL, Yang S, Long GX, Zhao ZK, Li XF, Gu MH: Manganese Toxicity in Sugarcane Plantlets Grown on Acidic Soils of Southern China. PLOS ONE 2016, 11(3):e0148956.
4.             da Silva Ferreira V , Sant'Anna C: Impact of culture conditions on the chlorophyll content of microalgae for biotechnological applications. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 2016, 33(1):20.
5.             Tanaka A, Tanaka R: Chlorophyll metabolism. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2006, 9(3):248-255.
6.             Li J, Cao X, Jia X, Liu L, Cao H, Qin W, Li M: Iron Deciency Leads to Chlorosis Through Impacting Chlorophyll Synthesis and Nitrogen Metabolism in Areca catechu L. Frontiers in Plant Science 2021, 12(1577).
7.             Wang M, Chen L, Liang Z, He X, Liu W, Jiang B, Yan J, Sun P , Cao Z, Peng Q et al: Metabolome and transcriptome analyses reveal chlorophyll and anthocyanin metabolism pathway associated with cucumber fruit skin color. BMC Plant Biology 2020, 20(1):386.
8.             Mandal R, Dutta G: From photosynthesis to biosensing: Chlorophyll proves to be a versatile molecule. Sensors International 2020, 1:100058.
9.             Li Y , He N, Hou J, Xu L, Liu C, Zhang J, Wang Q, Zhang X, Wu X: Factors Inuencing Leaf Chlorophyll Content in Natural Forests at the Biome Scale. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 2018, 6(64).
10.          Zhou K, Ren Y, Lv J, Wang Y, Liu F, Zhou F, Zhao S, Chen S, Peng C, Zhang X et al: Young Leaf Chlorosis 1, a chloroplast-localized gene required for chlorophyll and lutein accumulation during early leaf development in rice. Planta 2013, 237(1):279-292.
11.          Liu L, Lin N, Liu X, Yang S, Wang W, Wan X: From Chloroplast Biogenesis to Chlorophyll Accumulation: The Interplay of Light and Hormones on Gene Expression in Camellia sinensis cv. Shuchazao Leaves. Frontiers in Plant Science 2020, 11(256).
12.          Islam S, Bhor SA, Tanaka K, Sakamoto H, Yaeno T, Kaya H, Kobayashi K: Transcriptome Analysis Shows Activation of Stress and Defense Responses by Silencing of Chlorophyll Biosynthetic Enzyme CHLI in Transgenic Tobacco. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2020, 21(19):7044.
13.          Moran Lauter AN, Peiffer GA, Yin T, Whitham SA, Cook D, Shoemaker RC, Graham MA: Identication of candidate genes involved in early iron deciency chlorosis signaling in soybean (Glycine max) roots and leaves. BMC Genomics 2014, 15(1):702.
14.          Lucena JJ: Effects of bicarbonate, nitrate and other environmental factors on iron deciency chlorosis. A review. Journal of Plant Nutrition 2000, 23(11-12):1591-1606.
15.          Shrivastava A, Srivastava M, Shukla S, Gaur A, Darash R: Chlorosis-induced alterations in leaf laminae of sugarcane. In: 2004.

16.          Radhamani R, Kannan R, Rakkiyappan P: Leaf Chlorophyll Meter Readings as an Indicator for Sugarcane Yield Under Iron Decient Typic Haplustert. Sugar Tech 2016, 18(1):61-66.
17.          Fan Y-G, Chen R-F, Qiu L-H, Zhou Z-F, Zhou H-W, Wei J-G, Song X-P , Luo T, Lakshmanan P , Huang X et al: Quantitative Proteomics Analysis of Sugarcane Ratoon Crop Chlorosis. Sugar Tech 2021, 23(3):673-681.
18.          Yruela I: Transition metals in plant photosynthesis. Metallomics 2013, 5(9):1090-1109.
19.          Crandall SG, Gold KM, Jiménez-Gasco MDM, Filgueiras CC, Willett DS: A multi-omics approach to solving problems in plant disease ecology. PloS one 2020, 15(9):e0237975-e0237975.
20.          Li Y, Fang J, Qi X, Lin M, Zhong Y, Sun L, Cui W: Combined Analysis of the Fruit Metabolome and Transcriptome Reveals Candidate Genes Involved in Flavonoid Biosynthesis in Actinidia arguta. International journal of molecular sciences 2018, 19(5):1471.
21.          Wang Z, Cui Y, Vainstein A, Chen S, Ma H: Regulation of g (Ficus carica L.) fruit color: metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses of the avonoid biosynthetic pathway. Frontiers in Plant Science 2017, 8:1990.
22.          Bathke J, Konzer A, Remes B, McIntosh M, Klug G: Comparative analyses of the variation of the transcriptome and proteome of Rhodobacter sphaeroides throughout growth. BMC Genomics 2019, 20(1):358.
23.          Elsheery NI, Sunoj VSJ, Wen Y, Zhu JJ, Muralidharan G, Cao KF: Foliar application of nanoparticles mitigates the chilling effect on photosynthesis and photoprotection in sugarcane. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 2020, 149:50-60.
24.          Arnon DI: COPPER ENZYMES IN ISOLATED CHLOROPLASTS. POLYPHENOLOXIDASE IN BETA VULGARIS. Plant Physiol 1949, 24(1):1-15.
25.          Chen S, Zhou Y, Chen Y, Gu J: fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ preprocessor. Bioinformatics 2018, 34(17):i884-i890.
26.          Grabherr MG, Haas BJ, Yassour M, Levin JZ, Thompson DA, Amit I, Adiconis X, Fan L, Raychowdhury R, Zeng Q et al: Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome. Nature Biotechnology 2011, 29(7):644-652.
27.          Simão FA, Waterhouse RM, Ioannidis P , Kriventseva EV, Zdobnov EM: BUSCO: assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 2015, 31(19):3210-3212.
28.          Pertea M, Kim D, Pertea GM, Leek JT, Salzberg SL: Transcript-level expression analysis of RNA-seq experiments with HISAT, StringTie and Ballgown. Nat Protoc 2016, 11(9):1650-1667.
29.          Love MI, Huber W, Anders S: Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biology 2014, 15(12):550.
30.         Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP , Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT et al: Gene Ontology: tool for the unication of biology. Nature Genetics 2000, 25(1):25-29.

31.          Kanehisa M, Goto S: KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28(1):27-30.
32.          Chen W, Gong L, Guo Z, Wang W, Zhang H, Liu X, Yu S, Xiong L, Luo J: A Novel Integrated Method for Large-Scale Detection, Identication, and Quantication of Widely Targeted Metabolites: Application in the Study of Rice Metabolomics. Molecular Plant 2013, 6(6):1769-1780.
33.          Yun Y-H, Liang F, Deng B-C, Lai G-B, Gonçalves CMV, Lu H-M, Yan J, Huang X, Yi L-Z, Liang Y-Z: Informative metabolites identication by variable importance analysis based on random variable combination. Metabolomics 2015, 11(6):1539-1551.
34.          Huang N, Ling H, Liu F, Su Y, Su W, Mao H, Zhang X, Wang L, Chen R, Que Y: Identication and evaluation of PCR reference genes for host and pathogen in sugarcane-Sporisorium scitamineum interaction system. BMC Genomics 2018, 19(1):479.
35.          Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2- ΔΔCT method. methods 2001, 25(4):402-408.
36.          Zhou MM, Shoko MD: Simultaneous selection for yield and ratooning ability in sugarcane genotypes using analysis of covariance. South African Journal of Plant and Soil 2012, 29(2):93-100.
37.          Lai B, Hu B, Qin Y-H, Zhao J-T, Wang H-C, Hu G-B: Transcriptomic analysis of Litchi chinensis pericarp during maturation with a focus on chlorophyll degradation and avonoid biosynthesis. BMC genomics 2015, 16(1):225-225.
38.          McCormac AC, Fischer A, Kumar AM, Söll D, Terry MJ: Regulation of HEMA1 expression by phytochrome and a plastid signal during de-etiolation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 2001, 25(5):549-561.
39.          Lermontova I, Kruse E, Mock HP , Grimm B: Cloning and characterization of a plastidal and a mitochondrial isoform of tobacco protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997, 94(16):88958900.
40.          Stephenson PG, Terry MJ: Light signalling pathways regulating the Mg-chelatase branchpoint of chlorophyll synthesis during de-etiolation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Photochem Photobiol Sci 2008, 7(10):12431252.
41.          Bang WY, Jeong IS, Kim DW, Im CH, Ji C, Hwang SM, Kim SW, Son YS, Jeong J, Shiina T et al: Role of Arabidopsis CHL27 protein for photosynthesis, chloroplast development and gene expression proling. Plant Cell Physiol 2008, 49(9):1350-1363.
42.          Armstrong GA, Runge S, Frick G, Sperling U, Apel K: Identication of NADPH:protochlorophyllide oxidoreductases A and B: a branched pathway for light-dependent chlorophyll biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiol 1995, 108(4):1505-1517.
43.          Horie Y, Ito H, Kusaba M, Tanaka R, Tanaka A: Participation of chlorophyll b reductase in the initial step of the degradation of light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b-protein complexes in Arabidopsis. J Biol Chem 2009,

284(26):17449-17456.

44.          Wu H, Shi N, An X, Liu C, Fu H, Cao L, Feng Y, Sun D, Zhang L: Candidate Genes for Yellow Leaf Color in Common Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and Major Related Metabolic Pathways according to Transcriptome Proling. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2018, 19(6):1594.
45.          Buntin GD, Braman SK, Gilbertz DA, Phillips DV: Chlorosis, Photosynthesis, and Transpiration of Azalea Leaves After Azalea Lace Bug (Heteroptera: Tingidae) Feeding Injury. Journal of Economic Entomology 1996, 89(4):990-995.
46.          Plötner B, Nurmi M, Fischer A, Watanabe M, Schneeberger K, Holm S, Vaid N, Schöttler MA, Walther D, Hoefgen R et al: Chlorosis caused by two recessively interacting genes reveals a role of RNA helicase in hybrid breakdown in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 2017, 91(2):251-262.
47.          Shi K, Gu J, Guo H, Zhao L, Xie Y, Xiong H, Li J, Zhao S, Song X, Liu L: Transcriptome and proteomic analyses reveal multiple differences associated with chloroplast development in the spaceight-induced wheat albino mutant mta. PLOS ONE 2017, 12(5):e0177992.
48.          Hoffman GE, Sanchez-Puerta MV, Delwiche CF: Evolution of light-harvesting complex proteins from Chl c-containing algae. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11(1):101.
49.          Kovács Ls, Damkjær J, Kereïche S, Ilioaia C, Ruban AV, Boekema EJ, Jansson S, Horton P: Lack of the Light-Harvesting Complex CP24 Affects the Structure and Function of the Grana Membranes of Higher Plant Chloroplasts. The Plant Cell 2006, 18(11):3106-3120.
50.          Allen JF, de Paula WB, Puthiyaveetil S, Nield J: A structural phylogenetic map for chloroplast photosynthesis. Trends in plant science 2011, 16(12):645-655.
51.          Zhang L, Liu C, An X, Wu H, Feng Y, Wang H, Sun D: Identication and genetic mapping of a novel incompletely dominant yellow leaf color gene, Y1718, on chromosome 2BS in wheat. Euphytica 2017, 213(7):141.
52.          Ling GZ, Wang XX, Yang S, Tang XL, Jia SJ, Chang MM, Li XF: Natural Amelioration of Mn-induced Chlorosis Facilitated by Mn Down-regulation, Ammonium and Rainwater in Sugarcane Seedlings. bioRxiv 2019:618124.
53.          Wang HY, Klatte M, Jakoby M, Bäumlein H, Weisshaar B, Bauer P: Iron deciency-mediated stress regulation of four subgroup Ib BHLH genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta 2007, 226(4):897-908.
54.          Curie C, Panaviene Z, Loulergue C, Dellaporta SL, Briat JF, Walker EL: Maize yellow stripe1 encodes a membrane protein directly involved in Fe(III) uptake. Nature 2001, 409(6818):346-349.
55.          Petit JM, Briat JF, Lobréaux S: Structure and differential expression of the four members of the Arabidopsis thaliana ferritin gene family. Biochem J 2001, 359(Pt 3):575-582.
56.          Vogt T: Phenylpropanoid Biosynthesis. Molecular Plant 2010, 3(1):2-20.

57.          Zhang Q, Liu M, Ruan J: Metabolomics analysis reveals the metabolic and functional roles of avonoids in light-sensitive tea leaves. BMC Plant Biology 2017, 17(1):64.
58.          Waters BM, Amundsen K, Graef G: Gene Expression Proling of Iron Deciency Chlorosis Sensitive and Tolerant Soybean Indicates Key Roles for Phenylpropanoids under Alkalinity Stress. Frontiers in Plant Science 2018, 9(10).
59.          Schmid NB, Giehl RFH, Döll S, Mock H-P , Strehmel N, Scheel D, Kong X, Hider RC, von Wirén N: FeruloylCoA 6′-Hydroxylase1-Dependent Coumarins Mediate Iron Acquisition from Alkaline Substrates in Arabidopsis Plant Physiol 2013, 164(1):160-172.
60.          Fraser CM, Chapple C: The phenylpropanoid pathway in Arabidopsis. Arabidopsis Book 2011, 9:e0152e0152.

## Figures

A

B

Figure 1

<!-- image -->

The sugarcane eld with planted green plantlet and ratoon chlorotic plantlet (A). The green leave of control group (B) was collected with SPAD meter read higher than 40. The chlorotic leave of chlorosis group (C) was collected when the SPAD reads lower than 15.

<!-- image -->

C

<!-- image -->

Figure 2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The plantlet agronomic traits measurement in plant height (A), leaf number (B), stalk nod number (C), and tiller number (D). The x axis represents the date of sampling. The y axis represents the measurement of each agronomic trait.

## Figure 3

Summary of transcriptome of sugarcane in ratoon chlorosis leaves and planted plantlet green leaves. Transcriptome de novo assembly completeness analysis using BUSCO alignment (A). Complete orthologues include single copy (blue) and duplicated copies (green). Incomplete orthologues are fragmented (yellow). The missing (red) copies are not found in BUSCO database. The venn diagram of aligned and annotated assembly using multi databases (B). The distribution of species annotation unigenes (C). The volcano plot of expression unigenes (D). The up- and down- regulated genes are represent as red and yellow dots, while the light blue dots indicate the unigenes without signicant changes. The unigenes with fold change higher than 2 and p-value lower than 0.05 are determined as DEGs.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Figure 4

GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs. The 10 most enriched GO terms in cellular component (A), molecular function (B) and biological process (C). The number of X axial represents the ratio of DEGs in each term. Circle size denotes gene number. The 10 most enriched KEGG pathways (D). The number near each column represent the gene number and percent of that pathway, respectively. High and low p-values are denoted in red and blue, respectively.

## Figure 5

The diagram of chlorophyll metabolism pathway. (A) The chlorophyll metabolism pathway is presented in a way of successive reaction steps. The circle denotes chemical compound. The gene name upon arrow denotes RNA or protein. The normalized gene expression is showed in box with colors. The direction of arrow means activation. Colour gradients from green to red represents the Log2FC of the genes. (B) The chlorophyll concentrations in sugarcane leaves of control and chlorosis samples. Each value represents a sample. The red line indicates the mean value of each group. Unpaired t test was used to compare the different between the two groups. p-value = 0.024. ** denotes highly signicant. hemA, glutamyl-tRNA reductase; hemL, glutamate-1semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase; hemB, porphobilinogen synthase; hemE, uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase; hemF, coproporphyrinogen III oxidase; hemY, protoporphyrinogen/coproporphyrinogen III oxidase; chlH, magnesium chelatase subunit H; bchM, magnesium-protoporphyrin O-methyltransferase; chlE, magnesiumprotoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester (oxidative) cyclase; por, protochlorophyllide reductase; DVR, divinyl chlorophyllide a 8-vinyl-reductase; chlG, chlorophyll/bacteriochlorophyll a synthase; CLH, chlorophyllase; HCAR, 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase; NOL, chlorophyll(ide) b reductase; CAO, chlorophyllide a oxygenase.

<!-- image -->

## Figure 6

DEGs related to the photosynthesis pathways. (A) The KEGG pathway map of photosynthesis. (B) The KEGG pathway map of photosynthesis-antenna protein. The images were obtained from KEGG database. The DEGs expression pattern were used to annotated and generated a corresponding map. The green box with gene symbols denotes down-regulated expression in chlorosis group, while the red box denotes up-regulated expression. The genes without signicant change were displayed with grey box. (C) Expression prole of genes related to photosynthesis pathways. The vertical column represents a sample. The horizontal row represents a gene. The expression ratios are based on log2 RPKM value, and normalize at row level. Each gene is presented with gene ID and gene name. PsbA-Psb27, photosystem II structure proteins; PsaA-PsaX, photosystem I structure proteins; PetB-PetG, cytochrome b6/f complex proteins; PetF, ferredoxin; beta, fF-type H+/Na+transporting ATPase subunit beta; a, F-type H+-transporting ATPase subunit a; Lhca1-Lhca5, light-harvesting complex I chlorophyll a/b binding protein; Lhcb1-Lhcb7, light-harvesting complex II chlorophyll a/b binding protein 1.

## Figure 7

KEGG enrichment analysis and expression proles of DEGs related to metal ion homeostasis or transport. (A) The seven enriched pathways related to metal ion homeostasis or transport (p-value &lt; 0.05). The number near each column represent the gene number and percent of that pathway, respectively. High and low p-values are denoted in red and blue, respectively. (B) Heat map of expression prole of genes related to metal ion homeostasis or transport.

cellular metal ion homeostasis cellular transition metal ion homeostasis

transition metal ion homeostasis metal ion homeostasis

transition metal ion transport zinc Il ion transport

metal ion transport

00

7(5.1)

7(5.1)

9(4.98)

10(3.56)

11(2.86)

4(1.88)

05

10

1.5

Gene percent

31(1.54)

20

25

-log1O(pvalue)

B

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Figure 8

The diagram of phenylpropanoid synthesis pathway. The names in light-type letter are metabolites compounds. The DEGs are exhibited in bold-type letter upon the arrow. The fold change of DEGs and metabolites is shown in heatmap style. Square denotes DEGs, while the circle denotes the DEMs. Colour gradients from green to red represents the Log2FC of the genes or metabolites. PTAL, phenylalanine/tyrosine ammonia-lyase; C4H, transcinnamate 4-monooxygenase; C3H, 5-O-(4-coumaroyl)-D-quinate 3'-monooxygenase; COMT, caffeic acid 3-OmethyltransferaseGLYPH&lt;c=0,font=/Roboto-Regular&gt; 4CL, 4-coumarate--CoA ligase; HCT , shikimate O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase; CCoAOMT, caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase; CCR, cinnamoyl-CoA reductase; CAD, cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase; POD, peroxidase; F5H, ferulate-5-hydroxylase; EC:1.14.13.14, trans-cinnamate 2-monooxygenase; EC:2.4.1.114, 2coumarate O-beta-glucosyltransferase; BGLU, beta-glucosidase.

## Figure 9

The validation of transcriptome using qRT-PCR. (A) The 20 genes expression pattern of transcriptome and qRTPCR. The columns in black and grey denote the expression value of transcriptome and qRT-PCR, respectively. The value represents the log2 fold change in the chlorosis group comparing with the control group. (B) Correlation of transcriptome (x-axis) and qRT-PCR (y-axis) data.

## Supplementary Files

This is a list of supplementary les associated with this preprint. Click to download.

- TableS1primersofvalidation.xls
- TableS2allgenesexpressionandannotation.xls
- TableS3GOenrichment.xls
- TableS4KEGGenrichment.xls
- TableS5DEGsofchlorophyllmetabolism.xls
- TableS6DEGsofphotosynthesispathways.xls
- TableS7DEGsofmetaliontransport.xls
- TableS8allmetabolites.xls
- TableS9DEGsofphenylopropanoidbiosynthesis.xls
MATERIALS
## Materials And Methods

## Plant materials condition and chlorophyll content determination

GuiTang49 (GT49) was the sugarcane cultivar employed in this study, which was a cross progeny of ROC 22 and Ganzhe 14. GT49 was developed by Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China [23]. The sugarcane eld was located in Fusui, Chongzuo, Guangxi, China. The sugarcanes used in this research were rst planted on February 22, 2019. The canes were harvested on January 31, 2021, leaving the remained stubbles to grow. From the date ratoon sugarcane rst displayed the chlorotic symptom, a survey of plantlet height, leaf number, stalk number, and tiller number was conducted every ten days. On April 18, 2021, the rst expanded leaves(+1 leaves) of chlorosis (chlorosis group) and non-chlorosis (control group) plantlets were collected randomly for further experiments.

The chlorosis samples were conrmed using the SPAD chlorophyll meter (Konica Minolta, Japan) with a reading less than 10. In contrast, the planted sugarcanes with a reading higher than 40 were grouped as control samples. Approximately 0.1g of leaves were rinsed and ground. The chlorophyll was extracted with 80% acetone

for 24h in dark. The content of chlorophyll was determined using the spectrophotometric method according to Arnon [24].
DATA AVAILABILITY
## Supplementary Files

This is a list of supplementary les associated with this preprint. Click to download.

- TableS1primersofvalidation.xls
- TableS2allgenesexpressionandannotation.xls
- TableS3GOenrichment.xls
- TableS4KEGGenrichment.xls
- TableS5DEGsofchlorophyllmetabolism.xls
- TableS6DEGsofphotosynthesispathways.xls
- TableS7DEGsofmetaliontransport.xls
- TableS8allmetabolites.xls
- TableS9DEGsofphenylopropanoidbiosynthesis.xls
| Class          | Compounds                           |        Chlorosis |   Control |    VIP* |    p-value |   Log2_Fold change |
|----------------|-------------------------------------|------------------|-----------|---------|------------|--------------------|
| Alkaloids      | p- Hydroxymandelonitrile            | 430394           |    608420 | 1.1096  | 0.0202738  |          -0.49941  |
| Lipids         | Octadeca- 11E,13E,15Z-trienoic acid |      3.8442e+06  |   4741460 | 2.56436 | 0.00846175 |          -0.302648 |
| Lipids         | Eicosadienoic acid                  | 461728           |    577134 | 1.01769 | 0.00513142 |          -0.321863 |
| Lipids         | LysoPC 16:0                         |      4.33572e+06 |   6566380 | 4.19557 | 0.0343621  |          -0.598827 |
| Organic acids  | 2-Hydroxycinnamic acid*             | 319370           |    545734 | 1.15424 | 0.0231017  |          -0.772969 |
| Others         | (S)-2-Phenyloxirane                 | 896878           |   1115572 | 1.19134 | 0.0295079  |          -0.3148   |
| Phenolic acids | Phthalic anhydride                  | 710886           |    857740 | 1.05579 | 0.0213815  |          -0.270922 |
| Phenolic acids | Vanillin*                           |      1.56294e+06 |   1941380 | 1.53827 | 0.00423727 |          -0.31282  |
| Phenolic acids | 2- (Formylamino)benzoic acid        | 506076           |    742464 | 1.12174 | 0.00254916 |          -0.552967 |
| Phenolic acids | Coniferyl alcohol                   |  79553           |    231474 | 1.08262 | 0.00357173 |          -1.54086  |
| Phenolic acids | Ferulic acid                        | 285570           |    545394 | 1.34645 | 0.0128134  |          -0.933454 |
| Phenolic acids | Dibutyl phthalate*                  |      1.36614e+07 |  16021600 | 4.31622 | 0.0236722  |          -0.229913 |
| Phenolic acids | 5-O-Caffeoylshikimic acid           | 207131           |    406682 | 1.18068 | 0.0134125  |          -0.973356 |

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 17:01:06,691 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 17:01:06,693 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 17:01:06,693 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 17:01:06,693 - INFO - {"entries": [
    {
        "accession": "null",
        "accession_type": "null",
        "organism": "Sugarcane",
        "genotype": "GuiTang49",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "main text",
        "evidence_text": "The sugarcane cultivar employed in this study was GuiTang49 (GT49), which was a cross progeny of ROC 22 and Ganzhe 14."
    }
],
"notes": "No accession number or type mentioned in the article. The organism is identified as Sugarcane, and the genotype is specified as GuiTang49."}
2025-10-28 17:01:06,694 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJNA787323/10.1186_s12870-022-03588-8.json

2025-10-28 17:01:06,719 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.1186_s12870-022-03588-8.json (Title: Transcriptome and metabolome a...)
2025-10-28 17:01:06,719 - INFO - Characters: 68186
2025-10-28 17:01:06,720 - INFO - Words (approx): 10101
2025-10-28 17:01:06,720 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 13131.300000000001
2025-10-28 17:01:06,721 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 17:01:06,721 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 17:01:06,721 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        FULL TEXT
Introduction Sugarcane is a major food and energy crop globally. In China, sugarcane accounts for 90% of sugar production, contributing 6 to 8 billion RMB annually [ 1 ]. In Guangxi, the leading sugar-producing province in China, ratoon sugarcane accounted for 60–70% of the total planting area [ 2 ]. Ratooning is critical for reducing crop production costs. However, ratoon crops face various problems. Plantlet chlorosis is one of them which is now widespread in Guangxi. Approximately 40% of the sugarcane cultivated area in Guangxi is now affected, causing production loss ranging from 23 to 40% [ 2 , 3 ]. In plants, leaf chlorophyll loss causes chlorosis, and it could be due to accelerating chlorophyll catabolism or reduced chlorophyll production, or by both. Chlorophyll metabolism involves a series of enzymes, including HemA, HemB, chlH, chlM, por, and NOL [ 4 ]. Iron deficiency affects chlorophyll synthesis, causing chlorosis in Areca catechu (Arecaceae) [ 5 ]. Low expression of chlorophyll metabolism genes was found in light green cucumber [ 6 ]. Chlorophyll is the primary pigment that absorbs light energy for photosynthesis reactions [ 7 , 8 ]. Low chlorophyll content in chlorotic leaves decreased photosynthesis and fresh weight in Areca catechu and cucumber [ 5 , 9 ]. Chlorophyll biosynthesis plays a vital role in maintaining photosynthetic machinery [ 10 , 11 ]. Iron is an essential micronutrient for chlorophyll synthesis [ 12 ], and its deficiency is the most common cause of chlorosis [ 13 ]. Previous reports indicate that the chlorosis symptoms observed in ratoon sugarcane in Guangxi were similar to iron (Fe) chlorosis found in India, yet, the causal factors appear different [ 14 , 15 – 16 ]. Excessive Manganese (Mn) had been found in ratoon sugarcane chlorotic plantlets, which are likely to be adversely affecting iron (Fe) uptake and consequently chlorophyll biosynthesis [ 2 , 3 ]. Besides, metal ion homeostasis and transportation would also impact the chloroplast functions, including photosynthesis [ 17 ]. Mechanistic understanding of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis may provide new perspectives to explore potential genetic solutions for this crop production constraint. The advanced omics technologies enable a comprehensive molecular analysis of complex biological problems such as pathogenesis and nutritional disorders [ 18 ]. Transcriptome analysis provides a comprehensive gene expression profile of a particular phenotype, while metabolomics help identify changes in metabolites involved in various pathways associated with the same phenotype [ 19 , 20 ]. In chlorophyll metabolism, many metabolic pathways and genes interact in a complex way [ 6 , 19 ]. Comparative proteomics analysis revealed 199 and 80 proteins were down- and up-regulated in chlorotic leaves of ratoon sugarcane, respectively [ 16 ]. Through functional analysis and interaction analysis, proteins associated with photosynthesis, drought-response, and jasmonic acid biosynthesis displayed a significant correlation with ratoon sugarcane chlorosis symptoms [ 16 ]. Due to post-transcriptional modification processes, the correlation between transcriptome and proteome could be low [ 21 ]. Given this situation, exploring the mechanism underpinning ratoon sugarcane chlorosis requires both transcriptome and metabolome analyses. Our study aimed to describe the global response of sugarcane to ratoon chlorosis through transcriptome and metabolome analyses. Genes and metabolites related to chlorophyll metabolism, photosynthesis, metal ion homeostasis, and phenylopropanoid biosynthesis were analyzed. The findings of this present a new perspective of molecular regulatory mechanisms of chlorosis occurring in ratoon sugarcane. Materials and methods Plant materials, plant growing condition, and chlorophyll content determination A locally adapted commercial sugarcane cultivar, GuiTang49 (GT49) (ROC22 x Ganzhe 14), developed by Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China [ 1 , 22 ], was used for this study. The sugarcane experimental field was located in Fusui county, Chongzuo, Guangxi, China. All the study activities complied with the local and national legislation. For this experiment, GT49 stalks were planted on February 22, 2019, and the crop was harvested on January 31, 2021, leaving the stubbles to re-grow. When the ratoon sugarcane first displayed the chlorotic symptom, five chlorotic five non-chlorosis plants were selected randomly and grouped as chlorosis and control group, respectively. Plant height and the number of leaves and stalk nod number and tillers were recorded every 10 days for 2 months [ 23 ]. On April 18, 2021, the first expanded leaves(+ 1 leaves) of plantlets from both chlorosis and control groups were collected for further experiments. The leaf samples from chlorosis with SPAD chlorophyll meter (Konica Minolta, Japan) reading less than ten were classified as chlorotic and used for further experiments. In contrast, leaf samples from the control group with a reading higher than 40 were grouped and used as control. Approximately 0.1 g of leaves were rinsed and ground in liquid nitrogen, and chlorophyll was extracted with 80% acetone for 24 h in dark. The content of chlorophyll was determined using a spectrophotometer [ 24 ]. Transcriptome analysis Five leaves were included in one sample, and each group contained five samples (5 replicates). The total RNA was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA quality was assessed by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, USA) and agarose gel electrophoresis. The mRNA, enriched by Oligo (dT) beads, was fragmented and reverse transcribed into cDNA first-strand with random primers. After synthesizing second-strand cDNA, the total cDNA was purified with a QiaQuick PCR extraction kit (Qiagen, The Netherlands). Sequencing adapters were ligated to the cDNA. Size selection and PCR amplification were performed before sequencing. The sequencing was operated using Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, USA). Reads obtained from the sequencer were filtered before assembly using fastp [ 25 ]. The high-quality clean reads were processed to de novo assemble using the Trinity method [ 26 ]. The assembled reads with overlapping sequences were formed as contigs. Using clustering, the contigs that could not be extended on either end were defined as unigenes. BLASTx program, with an E-value threshold of 1e-5, was applied to annotate the obtained unigenes. Four databases, including the non-redundant protein database (NR), the Swiss-Prot database, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes Ortholog (KEGG) database, and the Clusters of Eukaryotic Ortholog Groups of proteins database (KOG, NCBI), were used in the annotation of unigenes. The completeness of assembly was assessed with BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs) [ 27 ]. Gene expression level was calculated using FPKM (fragments per kilobase per million reads) method with StringTie software [ 28 ]. Analyzing by DESeq software [ 29 ], genes with fold change ≥2 and p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered as DEGs (differential expressed genes). GO (gene ontology) and KEGG enrichment analysis was performed to depict the gene function and biological pathway of DEGs [ 30 , 31 ]. Metabolome analysis The freeze-dry leaf samples for metabolome analysis were ground using a mixer mill (MM 400, Retsch). 100 mg of leaf powder was extracted overnight with 1.0 ml of aqueous methanol containing 0.1 mg/L lidocaine as internal standard. The supernatant was obtained by centrifugation and filtration. The metabolite compounds were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS system (QTRAP 6500, Sciex, USA). The chromatographic separations were performed using a Waters ACQUITY C18 column (2.1 mm * 100 mm, 18 μm, Waters, USA) under a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min at 40 °C. The mobile phase was water (0.04% acetic acid) as Phase A and acidified acetonitrile (0.04% acetic acid) as Phase B. The separation was run in a gradient condition: 95:5 Phase A/Phase B for the first 10 min, 5:95 Phase A/Phase B for the 11th to 12th min, 95:5 Phase A/Phase B for the 13th to 15th min. The effluent was detected with Sciex Triple Quad 6500 mass spectrometer (Sciex, USA) in a positive ion mode. The quantification of metabolites was performed according to multiple reaction monitoring methods [ 32 ]. Analyst 1.6.1 software was applied for data filtering, peak detection, alignment, and calculation. Metabolites were identified by searching internal and public databases (MassBank, KNApSAcK, HMDB, MoTo DB, and METLIN) with the m/z values, retention times, and fragment patterns. Metabolites with thresholds of variable importance in projection (VIP) ≥ 1 and p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered to be significantly different between the chlorosis and control groups [ 33 ]. qRT-PCR validation The RNA used for transcriptome sequencing was also employed for qRT-PCR validation. The total RNA was digested by DNase, and reverse-transcribed into cDNA for qRT-PCR using PrimeScript RT reagent kit (TAKARA, Dalian, China). The ACAD gene was used as a reference gene to normalize the relative expression levels [ 34 ]. The qRT-PCR was performed on qTOWER Real-Time Thermal Cyclers (Analytik Jena, Germany). The relative expression rate was calculated with the -2ΔΔCT method [ 35 ]. A total of 20 genes, including up-and down-regulated genes, were randomly selected. All the primers of the validation gene are listed in Table S 1 . The correlation between transcriptome data and qRT-PCR was performed using simple linear regression analysis [ 36 ]. Results Phenotype analysis of chlorotic and green ratoon plants The ratoon plantlets displayed distinct chlorosis symptoms compared with the green plants found in the same field at the same time (Fig. 1 A). The SPAD reading showed a drastic reduction in chlorophyll content in chlorotic leaves compared to green ones (Fig. 1 B, C). To monitor the growth and development of the ratoon plants, we measured some agronomic traits. The plants showing chlorosis grew slower than the green ones. They were shorter (Fig. 2 A) with fewer leaves (Fig. 2 B), stalk nodes (Fig. 2 C), and tillers (Fig. 2 D). Fig. 1 The sugarcane field with ratoon chlorotic and green plants ( A ). The green leaves ( B , control) with SPAD reading higher than 40 and the chlorotic leaves ( C ) with SPAD reading lower than 10 were selected for experiments Fig. 2 Plant height ( A ), and the number of leaves ( B ), stalk nodes ( C ), and tillers number ( D ) of plants with and without chlorosis. The x-axis represents the date of sampling Global overview of sugarcane leaf transcriptome with chlorosis Since the ratoon sugarcane chlorosis is displayed conspicuously in the leaf, we hypothesized that the changes in leaf transcriptome might correlate with chlorotic responses at cellular and molecular levels. Using the same plantlets, we extracted the total RNA from the ten samples. A total of 621,045,632 reads were generated using Illumina HiSeq 4000. A total of 88,339 unigenes were de novo assembled using Trinity software. The average length of all the unigenes was 903 bp. To assess de novo assembled unigenes’ completeness, we took a quantitative measure with BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs). The results showed the percentage of conserved orthologues of plants represented in our assembled sugarcane transcriptome. Completeness of all the unigenes resulted in a high rate of complete plant orthologues (75%). Of the 1440 orthologues searched in the BUSCO set of plants, 75% was complete, with the number being 1080. Of the 1080 complete BUSCO orthologues, 1060 were single-copy, while the other 20 orthologues were duplicates. The proportion of fragmented and missing BUSCOs was 14 and 11%, respectively (Fig. 3 A). To annotate and classify the assembled unigenes, we employed four public protein databases to BLASTX the deduced peptides sequence of the unigenes, resulting in 48,816 unigenes being annotated (Table S 2 ). Of all the annotated unigenes, 48,275 (98.9%) unigenes showed a particular hit within the Nr database (Non-redundant protein sequence database). Those proteins were mainly from Zea mays , Setaria italica , and Oryza sativa Japonica. 5745 unigenes matched the Nr database entries only, while KEGG, Swissprot, and COG had 218, 176, and 35 unigenes, respectively, and they were single matched (Fig. 3 B). A total of 17,756 unigenes were found in all four databases. All the Nr hit genes were from 479 species. Of all the hits, 17,691 (36.65%) were significantly similar to proteins of Zea mays , and 7406 (15.34%) and 5484 (11.36%) were from Setaria italica and Oryza sativa Japonica Group, respectively (Fig. 3 C). According to some criteria (log2 fold-change > 1, p-value ≤ 0.05), we identified a total of 11,776 differentially expressed genes (DEG) between chlorosis and control groups (Fig. 3 D). Fig. 3 Summary of the transcriptome of sugarcane in ratoon chlorosis leaves and planted plantlet green leaves. Transcriptome de novo assembly completeness analysis using BUSCO alignment ( A ). Complete orthologues include a single copy (blue) and duplicated copies (green). Incomplete orthologues are fragmented (yellow). The missing (red) copies are not found in the BUSCO database. The Venn diagram of aligned and annotated assembly using multi databases ( B ). The distribution of species annotation unigenes ( C ). The volcano plot of expression unigenes ( D ). The up-and down-regulated genes are represented as red and yellow dots, while the light blue dots indicate the unigenes without significant changes. The unigenes with a fold change higher than 2 and a p-value lower than 0.05 are determined as DEGs Function analysis of DEGs in Chlorosis sugarcane Gene ontology (GO) analysis was employed to emphasize the function of DEGs. GO enrichment analysis revealed that DEGs were most enriched in GO cell component categories of membrane, thylakoid and intrinsic component of membrane (Fig. 4 A, Table S 3 ). In molecular function categories, tetrapyrrole binding, cellulose synthase activity and catalytic activity were the most enriched terms (Fig. 4 B, Table S 3 ). For the biological processes, glucan metabolic process (GO:0044042), cellular metal ion homeostasis (GO:0006875) and cellular transition metal ion homeostasis (GO:0046916) exhibited the highest association with DEGs of the chlorosis symptom (Fig. 4 C, Table S 3 ). To map the metabolic pathways of DEGs, we annotated these genes using KEGG analysis. A total of 31 pathways were significantly enriched from all the DEGs (Table S 4 ). Among them, 27 pathways were related to metabolism, while two environmental information processing pathways and two organismal systems pathways were observed. Biosynthesis of secondary metabolisms, Metabolic pathways and plant-pathogen interaction were the top three enriched pathways (Fig. 4 D). Fig. 4 GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs. The 10 most enriched GO terms in cellular component ( A ), molecular function ( B ), and biological process ( C ). The number of X axial represents the ratio of DEGs in each term. The circle size denotes gene number. The 10 most enriched KEGG pathways ( D ). The number near each column represents the gene number and percent of that pathway, respectively. High and low p-values are denoted in red and blue, respectively Expression of genes related to chlorophyll metabolism in chlorosis sugarcane The KEGG analysis indicated that DEGs involved in the chlorophyll metabolism pathway were enriched ( p-value = 0.0224, Table S 5 ). To further investigate this pathway, we found that sixteen genes were differently expressed in the chlorosis group compared to the control group, which included eleven down-regulated genes and five up-regulated genes (Fig. 5 A). The down-regulated genes encode enzymes covered almost the whole process of chlorophyll biosynthesis, including glutamyl – tRNA reductase (hemA, EC: 1.2.1.70), coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (hemF, EC: 1.3.3.3), protoporphyrinogen/coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (hemY, EC: 1.3.3.4), magnesium chelatase subunit H (chlH, EC: 6.6.1.1), Mg – protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester cyclase (chlE, EC: 1.14.13.81), protochlorophyllide reductase (por, EC: 1.3.1.33) and chlorophyll b reductase (NOL, EC: 1.1.1.294). The up-regulated genes encode uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (hemE, EC: 4.1.1.37), chlorophyllase (EC: 3.1.1.14) and chlorophyll a synthase (chlG, EC: 2.5.1.62). Also, the content of chlorophyll in chlorosis samples (average 0.40 mg/g) was significantly lower than control samples (3.03 mg/g) (Fig. 5 B). The gene expression pattern in the chlorophyll metabolism pathway, in which the majority of DEGs were down-regulated, was consistent with the reduction of chlorophyll content in chlorosis samples. Fig. 5 The diagram of the chlorophyll metabolism pathway. A The chlorophyll metabolism pathway is presented in a way of successive reaction steps. The circle denotes a chemical compound. The gene name upon the arrow denotes RNA or protein. The normalized gene expression is shown in a box with colors. The direction of the arrow means activation. Colour gradients from green to red represents the Log2FC of the genes. B The chlorophyll concentrations in sugarcane leaves of control and chlorosis samples. Each value represents a sample. The red line indicates the mean value of each group. An unpaired t-test was used to compare the differences between the two groups. p-value = 0.024. ** denotes highly significant. hemA, glutamyl-tRNA reductase; hemL, glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase; hemB, porphobilinogen synthase; hemE, uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase; hemF, coproporphyrinogen III oxidase; hemY, protoporphyrinogen/coproporphyrinogen III oxidase; chlH, magnesium chelatase subunit H; bchM, magnesium-protoporphyrin O-methyltransferase; chlE, magnesium-protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester (oxidative) cyclase; por, protochlorophyllide reductase; DVR, divinyl chlorophyllide a 8-vinyl-reductase; chlG, chlorophyll/bacteriochlorophyll a synthase; CLH, chlorophyllase; HCAR, 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase; NOL, chlorophyll (ide) b reductase; CAO, chlorophyllide a oxygenase Photosynthesis was adversely affected in chlorosis ratoon sugarcane Chlorophyll is the primary pigment to capture light energy. Considering the lack of chlorophyll in the chlorosis group, we noticed that two photosynthesis pathways, including photosynthesis-antenna proteins and photosynthesis, were also enriched by KEGG analysis (Table S 6 ). There were 36 DEGs related to KEGG photosynthesis pathways, including nine genes related to photosystem I (PSI), seven related to photosystem II (PSII), one related to cytochrome b6/f complex, three related to photosynthetic electron transport, two related to F-type ATPase, five related to light-harvesting chlorophyll protein complex I (LHCI) and nine related to LHCII (Fig. 6 A and B). Additionally, 32 genes, among the 36 DEGs of photosynthesis pathways, were significantly down-regulated in the chlorosis group, while only four genes showed up-regulated expression patterns (Fig. 6 C). Fig. 6 DEGs related to the photosynthesis pathways. A The KEGG pathway map of photosynthesis. B The KEGG pathway map of photosynthesis-antenna protein. The images were obtained from the KEGG database. The DEGs expression pattern was used to annotate and generate a corresponding map. The green box with gene symbols denotes down-regulated expression in the chlorosis group, while the red box denotes up-regulated expression. The genes without significant change were displayed with a grey box. C Expression profile of genes related to photosynthesis pathways. The vertical column represents a sample. The horizontal row represents a gene. The expression ratios are based on log2 RPKM value and normalized at row level. Each gene is presented with gene ID and gene name. PsbA-Psb27, photosystem II structure proteins; PsaA-PsaX, photosystem I structure proteins; PetB-PetG, cytochrome b6/f complex proteins; PetF, ferredoxin; beta, fF-type H+/Na + −transporting ATPase subunit beta; a, F-type H + -transporting ATPase subunit a; Lhca1-Lhca5, light-harvesting complex I chlorophyll a/b binding protein; Lhcb1-Lhcb7, light-harvesting complex II chlorophyll a/b binding protein 1 Metal ion homeostasis and transport processes under chlorosis ratoon sugarcane Among the 81 enriched GO biological processes, there were four categories related to metal ion homeostasis and three categories related to metal ion transport (Fig. 7 A, Table S 7 ). In the to metal ion homeostasis category, including cellular metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0006875), cellular transition metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0046916), transition metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0055076) and metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0055065), there were 10 DEGs with six down- and four up-regulated. Of the 31 DEGs found among the three metal ion transport processes, 15 were down- and 16 were up-regulated (Fig. 7 B). Homeostasis and transport processes had seven genes in common; they were two FER1 (unigene0002936, unigene0029675), Unidentified gene (unigene0019302), NHX2 (unigene0040569), DTX42 (unigene0056614), HMA1 (unigene0064621) and HCC1 (unigene0083098). Three genes, including TMN6 (unigene0036726), YS1 (unigene0055240) and IRO2 (unigene0085997), were only found in processes related to metal ion homeostasis. Fig. 7 KEGG enrichment analysis and expression profiles of DEGs related to metal ion homeostasis or transport. A The seven enriched pathways related to metal ion homeostasis or transport ( p-value < 0.05). The number near each column represents the gene number and percent of that pathway, respectively. High and low p-value s are denoted in red and blue, respectively. B Heat map of the expression profile of genes related to metal ion homeostasis or transport Metabolome analysis of the changes in chlorosis sugarcane To determine the differences of metabolites in ratoon chlorosis sugarcane, we performed metabolome analysis using LC-ESI-MS/MS system. A total of 598 compounds were identified and quantified (Table S 8 ). Thirteen compounds with VIP value ≥1 and p-value < 0.05 were classified as significantly differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) between the chlorosis and control groups. All these metabolites, including six phenolic acids, three lipids, one alkaloid, one organic acid and one other compound, were down-regulated in the chlorosis group (Table 1 ). Among them, the compound with the greatest variation in content was coniferyl alcohol with a fold change of − 2.9. KEGG pathway analysis demonstrated that the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was the most and only enriched pathway among the different metabolites ( p-value = 0.0088). The three compounds that belonged to the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were coniferyl alcohol, ferulic acid and 5-O-caffeoyl shikimic acid. Table 1 Differentially expressed metabolites between chlorosis and control groups Class Compounds Chlorosis Control VIP a p-value Log2_Fold change Alkaloids p-Hydroxymandelonitrile 430,394 608,420 1.10959687 0.02027379 −0.4994096 Lipids Octadeca-11E,13E,15Z-trienoic acid 3,844,200 4,741,460 2.56435704 0.00846175 −0.302648 Eicosadienoic acid 461,728 577,134 1.01768916 0.00513142 −0.3218631 LysoPC 16:0 4,335,720 6,566,380 4.19556532 0.03436214 −0.5988267 Organic acids 2-Hydroxycinnamic acid a 319,370 545,734 1.15424233 0.02310167 −0.7729691 Others (S)-2-Phenyloxirane 896,878 1,115,572 1.19133863 0.02950794 −0.3148 Phenolic acids Phthalic anhydride 710,886 857,740 1.05578543 0.02138151 −0.2709222 Vanillin a 1,562,940 1,941,380 1.53827326 0.00423727 −0.3128201 2-(Formylamino) benzoic acid 506,076 742,464 1.12174147 0.00254916 −0.552967 Coniferyl alcohol 79,553 231,474 1.08262447 0.00357173 −1.5408619 Ferulic acid 285,570 545,394 1.34644681 0.01281337 −0.9334544 Dibutyl phthalate a 13,661,400 16,021,600 4.31621733 0.02367218 −0.2299129 5-O-Caffeoylshikimic acid 207,131.2 406,682 1.18067851 0.01341248 −0.9733563 a VIP variable importance in projection The correlation of transcriptome and metabolome associated with phenylopropanoid biosynthesis To understand the changes of chlorosis in ratoon sugarcane, we further analyzed the correlation between metabolome and transcriptome. The only enriched pathway in differentially expressed metabolites, the phenylopropanoid biosynthesis pathway, was the fifth enriched pathway in DEGs of the transcriptome. A total of 92 genes were involved with the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway among the 11,776 DEGs, while three out of 13 differential metabolites belonged to this pathway. Sixty-two genes out of the 92 DEGs, were down-regulated (Fig. 8 , Table S 9 ). In our transcriptome, the POD gene, encoded a peroxidase, was identified expressed by 31 DEGs with 23 down-regulated and 8 up-regulated. Also, DEGs encoded HCT , PTAL , C3H , CCR , F5H , BGLU were mainly down-regulated in the chlorosis group. In contrast, we observed more up-regulation in CAD and 4CL . The down-regulation of the two essential genes, PTAL and C3H , could largely explain the low accumulation of ferulic acid and 5-O-caffeoyl shikimic acid (Table 1 ). Furthermore, the low accumulation of coniferyl-alcohol and down-regulation of POD and F5H indicated that the lignin biosynthesis was also impaired. Fig. 8 The diagram of the phenylpropanoid synthesis pathway. The names in light-type letters are metabolites compounds. The DEGs are exhibited in a bold-type letter upon the arrow. The fold change of DEGs and metabolites is shown in heatmap style. Square denotes DEGs, while the circle denotes the DEMs. Colour gradients from green to red represents the Log2FC of the genes or metabolites. PTAL, phenylalanine/tyrosine ammonia-lyase; C4H, trans-cinnamate 4-monooxygenase; C3H, 5-O-(4-coumaroyl)-D-quinate 3′-monooxygenase; COMT, caffeic acid 3-O-methyltransferase; 4CL, 4-coumarate--CoA ligase; HCT, shikimate O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase; CCoAOMT, caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase; CCR, cinnamoyl-CoA reductase; CAD, cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase; POD, peroxidase; F5H, ferulate-5-hydroxylase; EC:1.14.13.14, trans-cinnamate 2-monooxygenase; EC:2.4.1.114, 2-coumarate O-beta-glucosyltransferase; BGLU, beta-glucosidase qRT-PCR analysis To validate the DEGs expression pattern, we randomly selected 20 genes, including up-and down-regulated ones with high and low expression rates, for quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR assays. The primary expression trend of the 20 genes was consistent (Fig. 9 A). The value of transcriptome and qRT-PCR showed a significant positive correlation with the Pearson r-value of 0.9867. The linear regression of correlation analysis was conducted, resulting in the goodness of fit with an R square value of 0.9513 (Fig. 9 B). These results indicated that the transcriptome was reliable. Fig. 9 The validation of transcriptome using qRT-PCR. A The 20 genes expression pattern of transcriptome and qRT-PCR. The columns in black and grey denote the expression value of transcriptome and qRT-PCR, respectively. The value represents the log2 fold change in the chlorosis group compared with the control group. B Correlation of transcriptome (x-axis) and qRT-PCR (y-axis) data Discussion Ratooning is a cultivation method in sugarcane production [ 37 ]. Ratoon sugarcane chlorosis, despite reporting several decades ago, is still a severe problem, causing a significant economic loss in China [ 3 , 16 ]. The main reason for ratoon sugarcane chlorosis is considered to be the imbalance between Fe and Mn concentration, which may be induced by acidic soil, intense leaching, and continuous cultivation [ 2 , 3 ]. Although causes and treatments have been studied previously, the associated regulatory mechanisms of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis remain unclear. In this study, RNA-Seq was employed to demonstrate the global transcriptomic changes of ratoon sugarcane with chlorosis. DEGs related to chlorophyll metabolism, photosynthesis, and metal ion homeostasis were significantly affected by chlorosis. In addition, combining metabolome analysis, DEGs and DEMs were enriched in the phenylopropanoid biosynthesis pathway. Chlorophyll is the primary source of pigment in plant leaves, which is correlated with the green color [ 38 ]. The well-studied chlorophyll synthesis pathway involved many essential genes [ 4 , 39 ]. HemA, which catalyzes the glutamy-tRNA to L-Glutamate 1-semialdehyde, is the initial enzyme of chlorophyll synthesis that regulates the chlorophyll accumulation during de-etiolation [ 40 ]. HemY catalyzes the protoporphyrinogen-IX to protoporphyrin-IX, which is predominant in chlorophyll synthesis [ 41 ]. The magnesium chelatases subunit H, named chlH, catalyzes the magnesium ion and protoporphyrin-IX to form Mg-protoporphyrin-IX, which was found induced by light [ 42 ]. Knock-down of chlE, an Mg-protoporphyrin-IX monomehyl ester cyclase, resulted in retarded growth and chloroplast developmental defects in Arabidopsis [ 43 ]. The protochlorophyllide reductase (por), the enzyme that promotes a photoreduction of protochlorophyllide to chlorophyllide, plays a vital role in the greening stage [ 44 ]. NOL, a chlorophyll b reductase, plays a role in chlorophyll b degradation [ 45 ]. In this study, twelve down-regulated DEGs, including three hemA, one hemF, two hemY, two chlH, one chlE, two por, and one NOL, were found associated with the chlorophyll synthesis pathway (Fig. 5 ). Compared to the four up-regulated DEGs, including one hemF, one hemE, one chlG, and one CLH, the down-regulated genes in this pathway were in the majority. The same phenomenon was observed in wheat yellow leaves and light green cucumber [ 6 , 46 ]. These results indicate the direct relation between ratoon sugarcane chlorosis and the dysfunction of chlorophyll synthesis. Leaf photosynthesis is positively correlated with chlorophyll content [ 47 ]. In A. thaliana , photosynthetic efficiency reduction was accompanied by a decrease in chlorophyll content [ 48 ]. In wheat yellow leaves wheat, five genes encoding photosynthesis related proteins were significantly down-regulated [ 46 ]. Transcriptome and proteome analysis of a wheat mutant with albino leaves showed that the expression levels of both genes and proteins related to photosynthesis were lower than wild-type green wheat [ 49 ]. Likewise, we observed similar results in this study. There were 36 DEGs found in photosynthesis pathway, of which 32 were down-regulated (Fig. 6 ). The light-harvesting chlorophyll protein complexes (LHC) binds chlorophyll to function in the photosynthesis system [ 50 ]. Lack of the LHC would affect plants’ photosynthetic rate and growth [ 51 ]. In chlorosis sugarcane, we found that all the DEGs of LHC were down-regulated (Fig. 6 ), suggesting that the formation of photosynthesis’s antenna proteins would be affected. Photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast, which comprises chloroplast membrane, thylakoid, and matrix. The multi subunits complexes, including PSI, PSII, cytochrome b6/f complex, and photosynthetic electron transport, are embedded in the thylakoid membrane [ 52 ]. DEGs of these complexes were significantly repressed in chlorosis sugarcane (Fig. 6 ). The GO enrichment analysis of cellular components showed that five GO terms, including thylakoid, thylakoid part, photosystem, photosynthetic membrane, and plastid thylakoid, were among the top 10 enriched (Fig. 4 A). These results agreed with previous reports in wheat where yellow leaf mutant was caused by abnormal chloroplast development [ 53 ]. Studies of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis in Guangxi suggest that the excessive Mn accumulation in parent stalks was the main reason for chlorosis [ 3 ]. At the same time, the active Fe deficiency in plantlets played a secondary role [ 3 ]. The subsequent investigation revealed that, in the progression of the greening of chlorotic seedling, the leaf Mn content decreased significantly, whereas Fe content increased [ 54 ]. Mn shares similar chemical properties with Fe and Mn, and Fe interaction was observed in several physiological processes [ 55 ]. Mn transport is partially mediated by Fe transporter [ 56 ], and thus Mn accumulation in ratoon sugarcane may play a role in Fe deficiency. These findings are consistent with our results on metal ion metabolism disorder related gene expression in chlorosis sugarcane. Our GO analysis has shown that seven categories related to metal ion homeostasis and transport were significantly enriched (Fig. 7 A). A total of 34 DEGs were found in these categories (Fig. 7 B). Iron-phytosiderophore transporter (YS1) and transcription factor bHLH100 (IRO2) were up-regulated by iron deficiency [ 57 , 58 ]. Ferritin 1 (FER1), important for iron homeostasis, stores iron in a soluble form, is up-regulated by iron overload treatment [ 59 ]. In our study, two genes, YS1(unigene0055240) and IRO2(unigene0085997), were significantly increased with log2 FC higher than 8, while FER1 (unigene0002936, unigene0029675) were down-regulated with log2 FC lower than − 6 (Table S 7 ). Also, MRS2-B (Unigene0000001), a magnesium transporter, was found down-regulated in the chlorosis group (Fig. 7 B, Table S 7 ). These results indicated that the differential regulation of metal ion metabolism genes agreed with the imbalance of Fe and Mn. However, whether the asymmetry of metal ion induces differential gene expression or do the differentially expressed genes lead to iron deficiency in the leaf remains unclear. In a previous study, the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was enriched in both transcriptome and metabolome analysis of chlorosis A. catechu L. [ 5 ]. Combining transcriptome and metabolome analyses, we found 62 DEGs and 3 DEMs (differentially expressed metabolites) belong to the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway (Fig. 8 , Table S 9 , and Table 1 ). Interestingly, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis was the only enriched pathway in DEMs. These results indicate that phenylpropanoid biosynthesis could be involved in ratoon sugarcane chlorosis development. Phenylpropanoids contribute significantly to plants’ response towards biotic and abiotic stresses [ 60 ]. In chlorotic tea leaves, genes and metabolites related to phenylpropanoids biosynthesis showed lower expression than green leaf [ 61 ]. In an iron deficiency chlorosis tolerant soybean, genes in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were up-regulated in low Fe condition [ 62 ]. Synthesis of coumarins is part of Fe acquisition machinery in Arabidopsis [ 63 ]. We noticed the BGLU , a beta-glucosidase coding gene, was down-regulated in chlorosis sugarcane (Fig. 8 ). This result suggests that the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis was altered at the transcripts and metabolites level in chlorotic ratoon sugarcane. Given the central role of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis in plant growth and development [ 60 , 64 ], two secondary metabolic pathways, including flavonoids and phenylalanine, were found enriched in KEGG analysis (Fig. 4 D, Table S 4 ). Conclusions Here we studied transcriptome and metabolome responses of chlorotic and non-chlorotic sugarcane leaves. Our results provide more insights into chlorophyll synthesis, photosynthesis, metal ion metabolism, and phenylpropanoids biosynthesis in ratoon chlorosis sugarcane. Gene regulation dysfunction in metal ion homeostasis and transportation likely leads to Mn toxicity and Fe deficiency, which may cause ratoon chlorosis in sugarcane [ 3 ]. The reduction of chlorophyll content is likely due to the decreased chlorophyll synthesis pathway. Furthermore, the photosynthesis related genes were also affected significantly. The consistent results of metabolome and transcriptome of phenylpropanoids biosynthesis pathway suggest that the alteration in secondary metabolism plays a vital role in ratoon sugarcane chlorosis.
MATERIALS
. Materials and methods Plant materials, plant growing condition, and chlorophyll content determination A locally adapted commercial sugarcane cultivar, GuiTang49 (GT49) (ROC22 x Ganzhe 14), developed by Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China [ 1 , 22 ], was used for this study. The sugarcane experimental field was located in Fusui county, Chongzuo, Guangxi, China. All the study activities complied with the local and national legislation. For this experiment, GT49 stalks were planted on February 22, 2019, and the crop was harvested on January 31, 2021, leaving the stubbles to re-grow. When the ratoon sugarcane first displayed the chlorotic symptom, five chlorotic five non-chlorosis plants were selected randomly and grouped as chlorosis and control group, respectively. Plant height and the number of leaves and stalk nod number and tillers were recorded every 10 days for 2 months [ 23 ]. On April 18, 2021, the first expanded leaves(+ 1 leaves) of plantlets from both chlorosis and control groups were collected for further experiments. The leaf samples from chlorosis with SPAD chlorophyll meter (Konica Minolta, Japan) reading less than ten were classified as chlorotic and used for further experiments. In contrast, leaf samples from the control group with a reading higher than 40 were grouped and used as control. Approximately 0.1 g of leaves were rinsed and ground in liquid nitrogen, and chlorophyll was extracted with 80% acetone for 24 h in dark. The content of chlorophyll was determined using a spectrophotometer [ 24 ]. Transcriptome analysis Five leaves were included in one sample, and each group contained five samples (5 replicates). The total RNA was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA quality was assessed by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, USA) and agarose gel electrophoresis. The mRNA, enriched by Oligo (dT) beads, was fragmented and reverse transcribed into cDNA first-strand with random primers. After synthesizing second-strand cDNA, the total cDNA was purified with a QiaQuick PCR extraction kit (Qiagen, The Netherlands). Sequencing adapters were ligated to the cDNA. Size selection and PCR amplification were performed before sequencing. The sequencing was operated using Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, USA). Reads obtained from the sequencer were filtered before assembly using fastp [ 25 ]. The high-quality clean reads were processed to de novo assemble using the Trinity method [ 26 ]. The assembled reads with overlapping sequences were formed as contigs. Using clustering, the contigs that could not be extended on either end were defined as unigenes. BLASTx program, with an E-value threshold of 1e-5, was applied to annotate the obtained unigenes. Four databases, including the non-redundant protein database (NR), the Swiss-Prot database, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes Ortholog (KEGG) database, and the Clusters of Eukaryotic Ortholog Groups of proteins database (KOG, NCBI), were used in the annotation of unigenes. The completeness of assembly was assessed with BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs) [ 27 ]. Gene expression level was calculated using FPKM (fragments per kilobase per million reads) method with StringTie software [ 28 ]. Analyzing by DESeq software [ 29 ], genes with fold change ≥2 and p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered as DEGs (differential expressed genes). GO (gene ontology) and KEGG enrichment analysis was performed to depict the gene function and biological pathway of DEGs [ 30 , 31 ]. Metabolome analysis The freeze-dry leaf samples for metabolome analysis were ground using a mixer mill (MM 400, Retsch). 100 mg of leaf powder was extracted overnight with 1.0 ml of aqueous methanol containing 0.1 mg/L lidocaine as internal standard. The supernatant was obtained by centrifugation and filtration. The metabolite compounds were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS system (QTRAP 6500, Sciex, USA). The chromatographic separations were performed using a Waters ACQUITY C18 column (2.1 mm * 100 mm, 18 μm, Waters, USA) under a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min at 40 °C. The mobile phase was water (0.04% acetic acid) as Phase A and acidified acetonitrile (0.04% acetic acid) as Phase B. The separation was run in a gradient condition: 95:5 Phase A/Phase B for the first 10 min, 5:95 Phase A/Phase B for the 11th to 12th min, 95:5 Phase A/Phase B for the 13th to 15th min. The effluent was detected with Sciex Triple Quad 6500 mass spectrometer (Sciex, USA) in a positive ion mode. The quantification of metabolites was performed according to multiple reaction monitoring methods [ 32 ]. Analyst 1.6.1 software was applied for data filtering, peak detection, alignment, and calculation. Metabolites were identified by searching internal and public databases (MassBank, KNApSAcK, HMDB, MoTo DB, and METLIN) with the m/z values, retention times, and fragment patterns. Metabolites with thresholds of variable importance in projection (VIP) ≥ 1 and p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered to be significantly different between the chlorosis and control groups [ 33 ]. qRT-PCR validation The RNA used for transcriptome sequencing was also employed for qRT-PCR validation. The total RNA was digested by DNase, and reverse-transcribed into cDNA for qRT-PCR using PrimeScript RT reagent kit (TAKARA, Dalian, China). The ACAD gene was used as a reference gene to normalize the relative expression levels [ 34 ]. The qRT-PCR was performed on qTOWER Real-Time Thermal Cyclers (Analytik Jena, Germany). The relative expression rate was calculated with the -2ΔΔCT method [ 35 ]. A total of 20 genes, including up-and down-regulated genes, were randomly selected. All the primers of the validation gene are listed in Table S 1 . The correlation between transcriptome data and qRT-PCR was performed using simple linear regression analysis [ 36 ]. Results Phenotype analysis of chlorotic and green ratoon plants The ratoon plantlets displayed distinct chlorosis symptoms compared with the green plants found in the same field at the same time (Fig. 1 A). The SPAD reading showed a drastic reduction in chlorophyll content in chlorotic leaves compared to green ones (Fig. 1 B, C). To monitor the growth and development of the ratoon plants, we measured some agronomic traits. The plants showing chlorosis grew slower than the green ones. They were shorter (Fig. 2 A) with fewer leaves (Fig. 2 B), stalk nodes (Fig. 2 C), and tillers (Fig. 2 D). Fig. 1 The sugarcane field with ratoon chlorotic and green plants ( A ). The green leaves ( B , control) with SPAD reading higher than 40 and the chlorotic leaves ( C ) with SPAD reading lower than 10 were selected for experiments Fig. 2 Plant height ( A ), and the number of leaves ( B ), stalk nodes ( C ), and tillers number ( D ) of plants with and without chlorosis. The x-axis represents the date of sampling Global overview of sugarcane leaf transcriptome with chlorosis Since the ratoon sugarcane chlorosis is displayed conspicuously in the leaf, we hypothesized that the changes in leaf transcriptome might correlate with chlorotic responses at cellular and molecular levels. Using the same plantlets, we extracted the total RNA from the ten samples. A total of 621,045,632 reads were generated using Illumina HiSeq 4000. A total of 88,339 unigenes were de novo assembled using Trinity software. The average length of all the unigenes was 903 bp. To assess de novo assembled unigenes’ completeness, we took a quantitative measure with BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs). The results showed the percentage of conserved orthologues of plants represented in our assembled sugarcane transcriptome. Completeness of all the unigenes resulted in a high rate of complete plant orthologues (75%). Of the 1440 orthologues searched in the BUSCO set of plants, 75% was complete, with the number being 1080. Of the 1080 complete BUSCO orthologues, 1060 were single-copy, while the other 20 orthologues were duplicates. The proportion of fragmented and missing BUSCOs was 14 and 11%, respectively (Fig. 3 A). To annotate and classify the assembled unigenes, we employed four public protein databases to BLASTX the deduced peptides sequence of the unigenes, resulting in 48,816 unigenes being annotated (Table S 2 ). Of all the annotated unigenes, 48,275 (98.9%) unigenes showed a particular hit within the Nr database (Non-redundant protein sequence database). Those proteins were mainly from Zea mays , Setaria italica , and Oryza sativa Japonica. 5745 unigenes matched the Nr database entries only, while KEGG, Swissprot, and COG had 218, 176, and 35 unigenes, respectively, and they were single matched (Fig. 3 B). A total of 17,756 unigenes were found in all four databases. All the Nr hit genes were from 479 species. Of all the hits, 17,691 (36.65%) were significantly similar to proteins of Zea mays , and 7406 (15.34%) and 5484 (11.36%) were from Setaria italica and Oryza sativa Japonica Group, respectively (Fig. 3 C). According to some criteria (log2 fold-change > 1, p-value ≤ 0.05), we identified a total of 11,776 differentially expressed genes (DEG) between chlorosis and control groups (Fig. 3 D). Fig. 3 Summary of the transcriptome of sugarcane in ratoon chlorosis leaves and planted plantlet green leaves. Transcriptome de novo assembly completeness analysis using BUSCO alignment ( A ). Complete orthologues include a single copy (blue) and duplicated copies (green). Incomplete orthologues are fragmented (yellow). The missing (red) copies are not found in the BUSCO database. The Venn diagram of aligned and annotated assembly using multi databases ( B ). The distribution of species annotation unigenes ( C ). The volcano plot of expression unigenes ( D ). The up-and down-regulated genes are represented as red and yellow dots, while the light blue dots indicate the unigenes without significant changes. The unigenes with a fold change higher than 2 and a p-value lower than 0.05 are determined as DEGs Function analysis of DEGs in Chlorosis sugarcane Gene ontology (GO) analysis was employed to emphasize the function of DEGs. GO enrichment analysis revealed that DEGs were most enriched in GO cell component categories of membrane, thylakoid and intrinsic component of membrane (Fig. 4 A, Table S 3 ). In molecular function categories, tetrapyrrole binding, cellulose synthase activity and catalytic activity were the most enriched terms (Fig. 4 B, Table S 3 ). For the biological processes, glucan metabolic process (GO:0044042), cellular metal ion homeostasis (GO:0006875) and cellular transition metal ion homeostasis (GO:0046916) exhibited the highest association with DEGs of the chlorosis symptom (Fig. 4 C, Table S 3 ). To map the metabolic pathways of DEGs, we annotated these genes using KEGG analysis. A total of 31 pathways were significantly enriched from all the DEGs (Table S 4 ). Among them, 27 pathways were related to metabolism, while two environmental information processing pathways and two organismal systems pathways were observed. Biosynthesis of secondary metabolisms, Metabolic pathways and plant-pathogen interaction were the top three enriched pathways (Fig. 4 D). Fig. 4 GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs. The 10 most enriched GO terms in cellular component ( A ), molecular function ( B ), and biological process ( C ). The number of X axial represents the ratio of DEGs in each term. The circle size denotes gene number. The 10 most enriched KEGG pathways ( D ). The number near each column represents the gene number and percent of that pathway, respectively. High and low p-values are denoted in red and blue, respectively Expression of genes related to chlorophyll metabolism in chlorosis sugarcane The KEGG analysis indicated that DEGs involved in the chlorophyll metabolism pathway were enriched ( p-value = 0.0224, Table S 5 ). To further investigate this pathway, we found that sixteen genes were differently expressed in the chlorosis group compared to the control group, which included eleven down-regulated genes and five up-regulated genes (Fig. 5 A). The down-regulated genes encode enzymes covered almost the whole process of chlorophyll biosynthesis, including glutamyl – tRNA reductase (hemA, EC: 1.2.1.70), coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (hemF, EC: 1.3.3.3), protoporphyrinogen/coproporphyrinogen III oxidase (hemY, EC: 1.3.3.4), magnesium chelatase subunit H (chlH, EC: 6.6.1.1), Mg – protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester cyclase (chlE, EC: 1.14.13.81), protochlorophyllide reductase (por, EC: 1.3.1.33) and chlorophyll b reductase (NOL, EC: 1.1.1.294). The up-regulated genes encode uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (hemE, EC: 4.1.1.37), chlorophyllase (EC: 3.1.1.14) and chlorophyll a synthase (chlG, EC: 2.5.1.62). Also, the content of chlorophyll in chlorosis samples (average 0.40 mg/g) was significantly lower than control samples (3.03 mg/g) (Fig. 5 B). The gene expression pattern in the chlorophyll metabolism pathway, in which the majority of DEGs were down-regulated, was consistent with the reduction of chlorophyll content in chlorosis samples. Fig. 5 The diagram of the chlorophyll metabolism pathway. A The chlorophyll metabolism pathway is presented in a way of successive reaction steps. The circle denotes a chemical compound. The gene name upon the arrow denotes RNA or protein. The normalized gene expression is shown in a box with colors. The direction of the arrow means activation. Colour gradients from green to red represents the Log2FC of the genes. B The chlorophyll concentrations in sugarcane leaves of control and chlorosis samples. Each value represents a sample. The red line indicates the mean value of each group. An unpaired t-test was used to compare the differences between the two groups. p-value = 0.024. ** denotes highly significant. hemA, glutamyl-tRNA reductase; hemL, glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase; hemB, porphobilinogen synthase; hemE, uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase; hemF, coproporphyrinogen III oxidase; hemY, protoporphyrinogen/coproporphyrinogen III oxidase; chlH, magnesium chelatase subunit H; bchM, magnesium-protoporphyrin O-methyltransferase; chlE, magnesium-protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester (oxidative) cyclase; por, protochlorophyllide reductase; DVR, divinyl chlorophyllide a 8-vinyl-reductase; chlG, chlorophyll/bacteriochlorophyll a synthase; CLH, chlorophyllase; HCAR, 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a reductase; NOL, chlorophyll (ide) b reductase; CAO, chlorophyllide a oxygenase Photosynthesis was adversely affected in chlorosis ratoon sugarcane Chlorophyll is the primary pigment to capture light energy. Considering the lack of chlorophyll in the chlorosis group, we noticed that two photosynthesis pathways, including photosynthesis-antenna proteins and photosynthesis, were also enriched by KEGG analysis (Table S 6 ). There were 36 DEGs related to KEGG photosynthesis pathways, including nine genes related to photosystem I (PSI), seven related to photosystem II (PSII), one related to cytochrome b6/f complex, three related to photosynthetic electron transport, two related to F-type ATPase, five related to light-harvesting chlorophyll protein complex I (LHCI) and nine related to LHCII (Fig. 6 A and B). Additionally, 32 genes, among the 36 DEGs of photosynthesis pathways, were significantly down-regulated in the chlorosis group, while only four genes showed up-regulated expression patterns (Fig. 6 C). Fig. 6 DEGs related to the photosynthesis pathways. A The KEGG pathway map of photosynthesis. B The KEGG pathway map of photosynthesis-antenna protein. The images were obtained from the KEGG database. The DEGs expression pattern was used to annotate and generate a corresponding map. The green box with gene symbols denotes down-regulated expression in the chlorosis group, while the red box denotes up-regulated expression. The genes without significant change were displayed with a grey box. C Expression profile of genes related to photosynthesis pathways. The vertical column represents a sample. The horizontal row represents a gene. The expression ratios are based on log2 RPKM value and normalized at row level. Each gene is presented with gene ID and gene name. PsbA-Psb27, photosystem II structure proteins; PsaA-PsaX, photosystem I structure proteins; PetB-PetG, cytochrome b6/f complex proteins; PetF, ferredoxin; beta, fF-type H+/Na + −transporting ATPase subunit beta; a, F-type H + -transporting ATPase subunit a; Lhca1-Lhca5, light-harvesting complex I chlorophyll a/b binding protein; Lhcb1-Lhcb7, light-harvesting complex II chlorophyll a/b binding protein 1 Metal ion homeostasis and transport processes under chlorosis ratoon sugarcane Among the 81 enriched GO biological processes, there were four categories related to metal ion homeostasis and three categories related to metal ion transport (Fig. 7 A, Table S 7 ). In the to metal ion homeostasis category, including cellular metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0006875), cellular transition metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0046916), transition metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0055076) and metal ion homeostasis (GO: 0055065), there were 10 DEGs with six down- and four up-regulated. Of the 31 DEGs found among the three metal ion transport processes, 15 were down- and 16 were up-regulated (Fig. 7 B). Homeostasis and transport processes had seven genes in common; they were two FER1 (unigene0002936, unigene0029675), Unidentified gene (unigene0019302), NHX2 (unigene0040569), DTX42 (unigene0056614), HMA1 (unigene0064621) and HCC1 (unigene0083098). Three genes, including TMN6 (unigene0036726), YS1 (unigene0055240) and IRO2 (unigene0085997), were only found in processes related to metal ion homeostasis. Fig. 7 KEGG enrichment analysis and expression profiles of DEGs related to metal ion homeostasis or transport. A The seven enriched pathways related to metal ion homeostasis or transport ( p-value < 0.05). The number near each column represents the gene number and percent of that pathway, respectively. High and low p-value s are denoted in red and blue, respectively. B Heat map of the expression profile of genes related to metal ion homeostasis or transport Metabolome analysis of the changes in chlorosis sugarcane To determine the differences of metabolites in ratoon chlorosis sugarcane, we performed metabolome analysis using LC-ESI-MS/MS system. A total of 598 compounds were identified and quantified (Table S 8 ). Thirteen compounds with VIP value ≥1 and p-value < 0.05 were classified as significantly differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) between the chlorosis and control groups. All these metabolites, including six phenolic acids, three lipids, one alkaloid, one organic acid and one other compound, were down-regulated in the chlorosis group (Table 1 ). Among them, the compound with the greatest variation in content was coniferyl alcohol with a fold change of − 2.9. KEGG pathway analysis demonstrated that the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was the most and only enriched pathway among the different metabolites ( p-value = 0.0088). The three compounds that belonged to the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were coniferyl alcohol, ferulic acid and 5-O-caffeoyl shikimic acid. Table 1 Differentially expressed metabolites between chlorosis and control groups Class Compounds Chlorosis Control VIP a p-value Log2_Fold change Alkaloids p-Hydroxymandelonitrile 430,394 608,420 1.10959687 0.02027379 −0.4994096 Lipids Octadeca-11E,13E,15Z-trienoic acid 3,844,200 4,741,460 2.56435704 0.00846175 −0.302648 Eicosadienoic acid 461,728 577,134 1.01768916 0.00513142 −0.3218631 LysoPC 16:0 4,335,720 6,566,380 4.19556532 0.03436214 −0.5988267 Organic acids 2-Hydroxycinnamic acid a 319,370 545,734 1.15424233 0.02310167 −0.7729691 Others (S)-2-Phenyloxirane 896,878 1,115,572 1.19133863 0.02950794 −0.3148 Phenolic acids Phthalic anhydride 710,886 857,740 1.05578543 0.02138151 −0.2709222 Vanillin a 1,562,940 1,941,380 1.53827326 0.00423727 −0.3128201 2-(Formylamino) benzoic acid 506,076 742,464 1.12174147 0.00254916 −0.552967 Coniferyl alcohol 79,553 231,474 1.08262447 0.00357173 −1.5408619 Ferulic acid 285,570 545,394 1.34644681 0.01281337 −0.9334544 Dibutyl phthalate a 13,661,400 16,021,600 4.31621733 0.02367218 −0.2299129 5-O-Caffeoylshikimic acid 207,131.2 406,682 1.18067851 0.01341248 −0.9733563 a VIP variable importance in projection The correlation of transcriptome and metabolome associated with phenylopropanoid biosynthesis To understand the changes of chlorosis in ratoon sugarcane, we further analyzed the correlation between metabolome and transcriptome. The only enriched pathway in differentially expressed metabolites, the phenylopropanoid biosynthesis pathway, was the fifth enriched pathway in DEGs of the transcriptome. A total of 92 genes were involved with the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway among the 11,776 DEGs, while three out of 13 differential metabolites belonged to this pathway. Sixty-two genes out of the 92 DEGs, were down-regulated (Fig. 8 , Table S 9 ). In our transcriptome, the POD gene, encoded a peroxidase, was identified expressed by 31 DEGs with 23 down-regulated and 8 up-regulated. Also, DEGs encoded HCT , PTAL , C3H , CCR , F5H , BGLU were mainly down-regulated in the chlorosis group. In contrast, we observed more up-regulation in CAD and 4CL . The down-regulation of the two essential genes, PTAL and C3H , could largely explain the low accumulation of ferulic acid and 5-O-caffeoyl shikimic acid (Table 1 ). Furthermore, the low accumulation of coniferyl-alcohol and down-regulation of POD and F5H indicated that the lignin biosynthesis was also impaired. Fig. 8 The diagram of the phenylpropanoid synthesis pathway. The names in light-type letters are metabolites compounds. The DEGs are exhibited in a bold-type letter upon the arrow. The fold change of DEGs and metabolites is shown in heatmap style. Square denotes DEGs, while the circle denotes the DEMs. Colour gradients from green to red represents the Log2FC of the genes or metabolites. PTAL, phenylalanine/tyrosine ammonia-lyase; C4H, trans-cinnamate 4-monooxygenase; C3H, 5-O-(4-coumaroyl)-D-quinate 3′-monooxygenase; COMT, caffeic acid 3-O-methyltransferase; 4CL, 4-coumarate--CoA ligase; HCT, shikimate O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase; CCoAOMT, caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase; CCR, cinnamoyl-CoA reductase; CAD, cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase; POD, peroxidase; F5H, ferulate-5-hydroxylase; EC:1.14.13.14, trans-cinnamate 2-monooxygenase; EC:2.4.1.114, 2-coumarate O-beta-glucosyltransferase; BGLU, beta-glucosidase qRT-PCR analysis To validate the DEGs expression pattern, we randomly selected 20 genes, including up-and down-regulated ones with high and low expression rates, for quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR assays. The primary expression trend of the 20 genes was consistent (Fig. 9 A). The value of transcriptome and qRT-PCR showed a significant positive correlation with the Pearson r-value of 0.9867. The linear regression of correlation analysis was conducted, resulting in the goodness of fit with an R square value of 0.9513 (Fig. 9 B). These results indicated that the transcriptome was reliable. Fig. 9 The validation of transcriptome using qRT-PCR. A The 20 genes expression pattern of transcriptome and qRT-PCR. The columns in black and grey denote the expression value of transcriptome and qRT-PCR, respectively. The value represents the log2 fold change in the chlorosis group compared with the control group. B Correlation of transcriptome (x-axis) and qRT-PCR (y-axis) data Discussion Ratooning is a cultivation method in sugarcane production [ 37 ]. Ratoon sugarcane chlorosis, despite reporting several decades ago, is still a severe problem, causing a significant economic loss in China [ 3 , 16 ]. The main reason for ratoon sugarcane chlorosis is considered to be the imbalance between Fe and Mn concentration, which may be induced by acidic soil, intense leaching, and continuous cultivation [ 2 , 3 ]. Although causes and treatments have been studied previously, the associated regulatory mechanisms of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis remain unclear. In this study, RNA-Seq was employed to demonstrate the global transcriptomic changes of ratoon sugarcane with chlorosis. DEGs related to chlorophyll metabolism, photosynthesis, and metal ion homeostasis were significantly affected by chlorosis. In addition, combining metabolome analysis, DEGs and DEMs were enriched in the phenylopropanoid biosynthesis pathway. Chlorophyll is the primary source of pigment in plant leaves, which is correlated with the green color [ 38 ]. The well-studied chlorophyll synthesis pathway involved many essential genes [ 4 , 39 ]. HemA, which catalyzes the glutamy-tRNA to L-Glutamate 1-semialdehyde, is the initial enzyme of chlorophyll synthesis that regulates the chlorophyll accumulation during de-etiolation [ 40 ]. HemY catalyzes the protoporphyrinogen-IX to protoporphyrin-IX, which is predominant in chlorophyll synthesis [ 41 ]. The magnesium chelatases subunit H, named chlH, catalyzes the magnesium ion and protoporphyrin-IX to form Mg-protoporphyrin-IX, which was found induced by light [ 42 ]. Knock-down of chlE, an Mg-protoporphyrin-IX monomehyl ester cyclase, resulted in retarded growth and chloroplast developmental defects in Arabidopsis [ 43 ]. The protochlorophyllide reductase (por), the enzyme that promotes a photoreduction of protochlorophyllide to chlorophyllide, plays a vital role in the greening stage [ 44 ]. NOL, a chlorophyll b reductase, plays a role in chlorophyll b degradation [ 45 ]. In this study, twelve down-regulated DEGs, including three hemA, one hemF, two hemY, two chlH, one chlE, two por, and one NOL, were found associated with the chlorophyll synthesis pathway (Fig. 5 ). Compared to the four up-regulated DEGs, including one hemF, one hemE, one chlG, and one CLH, the down-regulated genes in this pathway were in the majority. The same phenomenon was observed in wheat yellow leaves and light green cucumber [ 6 , 46 ]. These results indicate the direct relation between ratoon sugarcane chlorosis and the dysfunction of chlorophyll synthesis. Leaf photosynthesis is positively correlated with chlorophyll content [ 47 ]. In A. thaliana , photosynthetic efficiency reduction was accompanied by a decrease in chlorophyll content [ 48 ]. In wheat yellow leaves wheat, five genes encoding photosynthesis related proteins were significantly down-regulated [ 46 ]. Transcriptome and proteome analysis of a wheat mutant with albino leaves showed that the expression levels of both genes and proteins related to photosynthesis were lower than wild-type green wheat [ 49 ]. Likewise, we observed similar results in this study. There were 36 DEGs found in photosynthesis pathway, of which 32 were down-regulated (Fig. 6 ). The light-harvesting chlorophyll protein complexes (LHC) binds chlorophyll to function in the photosynthesis system [ 50 ]. Lack of the LHC would affect plants’ photosynthetic rate and growth [ 51 ]. In chlorosis sugarcane, we found that all the DEGs of LHC were down-regulated (Fig. 6 ), suggesting that the formation of photosynthesis’s antenna proteins would be affected. Photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast, which comprises chloroplast membrane, thylakoid, and matrix. The multi subunits complexes, including PSI, PSII, cytochrome b6/f complex, and photosynthetic electron transport, are embedded in the thylakoid membrane [ 52 ]. DEGs of these complexes were significantly repressed in chlorosis sugarcane (Fig. 6 ). The GO enrichment analysis of cellular components showed that five GO terms, including thylakoid, thylakoid part, photosystem, photosynthetic membrane, and plastid thylakoid, were among the top 10 enriched (Fig. 4 A). These results agreed with previous reports in wheat where yellow leaf mutant was caused by abnormal chloroplast development [ 53 ]. Studies of ratoon sugarcane chlorosis in Guangxi suggest that the excessive Mn accumulation in parent stalks was the main reason for chlorosis [ 3 ]. At the same time, the active Fe deficiency in plantlets played a secondary role [ 3 ]. The subsequent investigation revealed that, in the progression of the greening of chlorotic seedling, the leaf Mn content decreased significantly, whereas Fe content increased [ 54 ]. Mn shares similar chemical properties with Fe and Mn, and Fe interaction was observed in several physiological processes [ 55 ]. Mn transport is partially mediated by Fe transporter [ 56 ], and thus Mn accumulation in ratoon sugarcane may play a role in Fe deficiency. These findings are consistent with our results on metal ion metabolism disorder related gene expression in chlorosis sugarcane. Our GO analysis has shown that seven categories related to metal ion homeostasis and transport were significantly enriched (Fig. 7 A). A total of 34 DEGs were found in these categories (Fig. 7 B). Iron-phytosiderophore transporter (YS1) and transcription factor bHLH100 (IRO2) were up-regulated by iron deficiency [ 57 , 58 ]. Ferritin 1 (FER1), important for iron homeostasis, stores iron in a soluble form, is up-regulated by iron overload treatment [ 59 ]. In our study, two genes, YS1(unigene0055240) and IRO2(unigene0085997), were significantly increased with log2 FC higher than 8, while FER1 (unigene0002936, unigene0029675) were down-regulated with log2 FC lower than − 6 (Table S 7 ). Also, MRS2-B (Unigene0000001), a magnesium transporter, was found down-regulated in the chlorosis group (Fig. 7 B, Table S 7 ). These results indicated that the differential regulation of metal ion metabolism genes agreed with the imbalance of Fe and Mn. However, whether the asymmetry of metal ion induces differential gene expression or do the differentially expressed genes lead to iron deficiency in the leaf remains unclear. In a previous study, the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was enriched in both transcriptome and metabolome analysis of chlorosis A. catechu L. [ 5 ]. Combining transcriptome and metabolome analyses, we found 62 DEGs and 3 DEMs (differentially expressed metabolites) belong to the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway (Fig. 8 , Table S 9 , and Table 1 ). Interestingly, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis was the only enriched pathway in DEMs. These results indicate that phenylpropanoid biosynthesis could be involved in ratoon sugarcane chlorosis development. Phenylpropanoids contribute significantly to plants’ response towards biotic and abiotic stresses [ 60 ]. In chlorotic tea leaves, genes and metabolites related to phenylpropanoids biosynthesis showed lower expression than green leaf [ 61 ]. In an iron deficiency chlorosis tolerant soybean, genes in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were up-regulated in low Fe condition [ 62 ]. Synthesis of coumarins is part of Fe acquisition machinery in Arabidopsis [ 63 ]. We noticed the BGLU , a beta-glucosidase coding gene, was down-regulated in chlorosis sugarcane (Fig. 8 ). This result suggests that the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis was altered at the transcripts and metabolites level in chlorotic ratoon sugarcane. Given the central role of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis in plant growth and development [ 60 , 64 ], two secondary metabolic pathways, including flavonoids and phenylalanine, were found enriched in KEGG analysis (Fig. 4 D, Table S 4 ). Conclusions Here we studied transcriptome and metabolome responses of chlorotic and non-chlorotic sugarcane leaves. Our results provide more insights into chlorophyll synthesis, photosynthesis, metal ion metabolism, and phenylpropanoids biosynthesis in ratoon chlorosis sugarcane. Gene regulation dysfunction in metal ion homeostasis and transportation likely leads to Mn toxicity and Fe deficiency, which may cause ratoon chlorosis in sugarcane [ 3 ]. The reduction of chlorophyll content is likely due to the decreased chlorophyll synthesis pathway. Furthermore, the photosynthesis related genes were also affected significantly. The consistent results of metabolome and transcriptome of phenylpropanoids biosynthesis pathway suggest that the alteration in secondary metabolism plays a vital role in ratoon sugarcane chlorosis.
        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 17:03:06,583 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 17:03:06,586 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 17:03:06,586 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 17:03:06,586 - INFO - {"entries": [
    {
        "accession": null,
        "accession_type": null,
        "organism": "Saccharum officinarum",
        "genotype": "ratoon sugarcane",
        "confidence": "high",
        "source_location": "main text",
        "evidence_text": null
    }
],
"notes": "The article discusses ratoon sugarcane chlorosis, a problem causing significant economic loss in China. The study used RNA-Seq to demonstrate global transcriptomic changes of ratoon sugarcane with chlorosis. DEGs related to chlorophyll metabolism, photosynthesis, and metal ion homeostasis were significantly affected by chlorosis."}
2025-10-28 17:03:06,586 - INFO - Processing file: /home/diegoj/LLM/data-test/json/sugarcane/rna/PRJEB41560/10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf

2025-10-28 17:03:06,592 - INFO - detected formats: [<InputFormat.PDF: 'pdf'>]
2025-10-28 17:03:06,625 - INFO - Going to convert document batch...
2025-10-28 17:03:06,625 - INFO - Initializing pipeline for StandardPdfPipeline with options hash 5f7f6517f72f4ee63b4977e857fdeb61
2025-10-28 17:03:06,625 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 17:03:08,203 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 17:03:09,049 - INFO - Accelerator device: 'cuda:0'
2025-10-28 17:03:09,402 - INFO - Processing document 10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf
2025-10-28 17:03:32,048 - INFO - Finished converting document 10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf in 25.46 sec.
2025-10-28 17:03:32,099 - WARNING - Parameter `strict_text` has been deprecated and will be ignored.
2025-10-28 17:03:32,105 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 17:03:32,106 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 17:03:32,106 - WARNING - Usage of TableItem.export_to_markdown() without `doc` argument is deprecated.
2025-10-28 17:03:32,117 - INFO - Extracted text from 10.3389_fpls.2021.668623.pdf
2025-10-28 17:03:32,117 - INFO - Characters: 179615
2025-10-28 17:03:32,119 - INFO - Words (approx): 23305
2025-10-28 17:03:32,120 - INFO - Tokens (rough): 30296.5
2025-10-28 17:03:32,120 - INFO - Running LLM extraction for Genotype data...
2025-10-28 17:03:32,120 - INFO - 


2025-10-28 17:03:32,120 - INFO - Using prompt: Extract all genotype and NCBI accession information from the scientific article below. You MUST follow these steps:

        STEP 1 - SYSTEMATIC READING:
        Read the ENTIRE article text carefully, section by section:
        - Abstract: Check for study overview and organism mentions
        - Introduction: Look for study context and varieties being investigated
        - Materials and Methods: PRIMARY source for genotypes and sample descriptions
        - Results: Check for any additional genotype details or data references
        - Discussion: May contain references to data deposition
        - Data Availability Statement: CRITICAL section for NCBI accessions
        - Supplementary Information references: Note what information is external
        - Acknowledgments: Sometimes contains data repository information
        - TABLES: Pay special attention to tables (often formatted with pipes |, dashes -, or aligned columns). Tables frequently contain:
            * Sample/accession mappings (e.g., "Sample ID | Cultivar | Accession")
            * Genotype lists with corresponding metadata
            * Sequencing run information with SRA/BioSample IDs
            * Look for column headers like: Sample, Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Accession, BioProject, SRA, BioSample, Run ID

        STEP 2 - INFORMATION IDENTIFICATION:
        Target Information to Extract (ONLY from the provided text):
        a) Genotypes: cultivar names, variety names, breeding lines, strain identifiers, clone designations, wild-type references, mutant names, genetic backgrounds, germplasm accessions
        b) NCBI Accessions: BioProject IDs (PRJNA*), SRA IDs (SRR*, SRX*, SRP*), BioSample IDs (SAMN*, SAMD*, SAME*), GEO IDs (GSE*, GSM*), GenBank accessions

        SPECIAL ATTENTION TO TABLES:
        - Tables may appear as:
            * Pipe-delimited format: | Column1 | Column2 | Column3 |
            * Space-aligned columns with headers and data rows
            * CSV-like format with commas
            * Mixed format with irregular spacing
        - Look for table indicators: "Table X", "Table X.", numbered tables, or section headers like "Sample Information"
        - Common table column headers that contain target information:
            * Genotype columns: Cultivar, Variety, Genotype, Strain, Line, Clone, Accession (germplasm), Sample Name, Material
            * NCBI columns: SRA, BioSample, Run, Accession, GEO, GenBank, BioProject ID
        - Read tables row by row, extracting genotype-accession pairs from each row
        - If a BioProject is mentioned before/after the table, it applies to all entries in that table

        STEP 3 - ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS:
        - Link each genotype with its corresponding NCBI accession when both are present
        - If multiple genotypes share the same accession series, create separate entries
        - Note any ambiguities in associations
        - HANDLE EDGE CASES:
            * Multiple organisms: Create separate entries for each organism-genotype-accession combination
            * Replicates: If same genotype has multiple accessions (biological/technical replicates), create one entry per accession
            * Pooled samples: If multiple genotypes are pooled into one accession, create one entry and note pooling in evidence_text
            * Wild-type vs mutants: Treat as distinct genotypes (e.g., "Col-0" vs "Col-0 mutant X")
            * Genotype synonyms: If article uses multiple names for same genotype, choose the most specific/official name

        STEP 4 - CONFIDENCE ASSESSMENT:
        - HIGH: Explicit mention with clear association between genotype and accession
        - MEDIUM: Genotype clear but accession referenced elsewhere, OR accession clear but genotype inferred from context
        - LOW: Ambiguous mentions, incomplete information, or indirect references

        STEP 5 - SOURCE TRACKING:
        - "main text": Information in the primary article body
        - "supplementary file": Referenced in supplementary materials (but actual content not in provided text)
        - "data availability statement": In data/code availability sections
        - "methods appendix": In detailed methods/materials sections
        - "not found": Information explicitly missing from the document

        STEP 6 - REASONING OUTPUT (MANDATORY):
        Before generating the final JSON, you MUST output your reasoning process in plain text using this format:
        
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        1. Article Scan Summary: [Brief overview of what sections contain relevant information]
        2. Genotypes Found: [List all genotypes identified with their locations]
        3. Accessions Found: [List all NCBI accessions identified with their locations]
        4. Association Logic: [Explain how you linked genotypes to accessions]
        5. Ambiguities/Challenges: [Note any unclear cases or missing information]
        6. Confidence Rationale: [Explain confidence levels assigned]
        === END REASONING ===

        STEP 7 - GENERATE JSON OUTPUT:
        After your reasoning, create JSON following the exact format shown in the examples above.

        
        Example 1 - Complete Information:

        Article excerpt: "RNA was extracted from leaf samples of sugarcane cultivar 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'. Libraries were sequenced and deposited in NCBI under BioProject PRJNA123456 with individual SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544 for SP80-3280 and RB867515, respectively."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: Two cultivars mentioned - 'SP80-3280' and 'RB867515'
        2. Identify accessions: BioProject PRJNA123456, SRA accessions SRR9876543 and SRR9876544
        3. Link genotypes to accessions: Text explicitly links SP80-3280 to SRR9876543 and RB867515 to SRR9876544
        4. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit mentions with clear associations
        5. Determine source location: This is in main text (methods section)

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876543",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "SP80-3280",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRA accessions SRR9876543 for SP80-3280"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR9876544",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Saccharum spp.",
                    "genotype": "RB867515",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "SRR9876544 for RB867515"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Both cultivars clearly identified with direct SRA accession links under BioProject PRJNA123456"
        }

        Example 2 - Missing Accession:

        Article excerpt: "We analyzed drought stress responses in citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions. Detailed sequencing information is provided in Supplementary Table S3."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify genotypes: One variety mentioned - 'Pera'
        2. Identify accessions: No accessions in this excerpt
        3. Check supplementary reference: Article mentions Supplementary Table S3 contains sequencing info
        4. Assess confidence: MEDIUM - genotype is clear, but accession location is referenced
        5. Determine source location: Genotype in main text, accession in supplementary file

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": null,
                    "accession_type": null,
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Pera",
                    "confidence": "medium",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "citrus variety 'Pera' grown under field conditions"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "Accession information referenced in Supplementary Table S3 but not provided in main text"
        }

        Example 3 - Table Format:

        Article excerpt: "Sequencing data for all samples are summarized in Table 2:

        Table 2. Sample information and sequencing accessions
        | Sample ID | Cultivar    | Tissue | SRA Accession | BioSample    |
        |-----------|-------------|--------|---------------|--------------|
        | S1        | Valencia    | Leaf   | SRR12345678   | SAMN10001234 |
        | S2        | Valencia    | Root   | SRR12345679   | SAMN10001235 |
        | S3        | Hamlin      | Leaf   | SRR12345680   | SAMN10001236 |

        All samples are deposited under BioProject PRJNA555555."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Identify table structure: This is clearly a table with pipe-delimited columns
        2. Parse table headers: Sample ID, Cultivar, Tissue, SRA Accession, BioSample
        3. Extract row data: Three samples with cultivars Valencia (2x) and Hamlin (1x)
        4. Link genotypes to accessions: Each row links cultivar to specific SRA and BioSample IDs
        5. Assess confidence: HIGH - explicit tabular mapping with clear associations
        6. Note BioProject: PRJNA555555 applies to all samples

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345678",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S1, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345678"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345679",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Valencia",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S2, Cultivar Valencia, SRA Accession SRR12345679"
                },
                {
                    "accession": "SRR12345680",
                    "accession_type": "SRA",
                    "organism": "Citrus spp.",
                    "genotype": "Hamlin",
                    "confidence": "high",
                    "source_location": "main text",
                    "evidence_text": "Table 2: Sample S3, Cultivar Hamlin, SRA Accession SRR12345680"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "All samples under BioProject PRJNA555555. Information extracted from Table 2 with clear cultivar-to-accession mappings."
        }

        Example 4 - No Information Found:

        Article excerpt: "Our review summarizes recent advances in plant genomics and their applications in breeding programs."

        Reasoning Steps:
        1. Search for genotypes: No specific cultivars, varieties, or strains mentioned
        2. Search for accessions: No NCBI identifiers present
        3. Check context: This is a review article without experimental data
        4. Assess completeness: No extractable information

        Output:
        {
            "entries": [],
            "notes": "This appears to be a review article with no specific genotype information or NCBI accessions mentioned in the provided text"
        }
        

        Now analyze this article:

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT BEGIN ====
        <!-- image -->

## Edited by:

Dirk Walther,

Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Germany

## Reviewed by:

Prathima Perumal Thirugnanasambandam, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Coimbatore, India Ertugrul Filiz, Duzce University, Turkey

## *Correspondence:

Anete Pereira de Souza anete@unicamp.br

## Specialty section:

This article was submitted to Plant Systems and Synthetic Biology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Plant Science

Received: 16 February 2021 Accepted: 17 March 2021 Published: 07 July 2021

## Citation:

Aono AH, Pimenta RJG, Garcia ALB, Correr FH, Hosaka GK, Carrasco MM, Cardoso-Silva CB, Mancini MC, Sforça DA, dos Santos LB, Nagai JS, Pinto LR, Landell MGdA, Carneiro MS, Balsalobre TW, Quiles MG, Pereira WA, Margarido GRA and de Souza AP (2021) The Wild Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes: Insights Into Expansion, Diversification, and Expression Patterns. Front. Plant Sci. 12:668623. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.668623

<!-- image -->

## The Wild Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes: Insights Into Expansion, Diversification, and Expression Patterns

Alexandre Hild Aono 1 , Ricardo José Gonzaga Pimenta  1 , Ana Letycia Basso Garcia 2 , Fernando Henrique Correr  2 , Guilherme Kenichi Hosaka 2 , Marishani Marin Carrasco 1 , Cláudio Benício Cardoso-Silva 1 , Melina Cristina Mancini 1 , Danilo Augusto Sforça 1 , Lucas Borges dos Santos  1 , James Shiniti Nagai 3 , Luciana Rossini Pinto 4 , Marcos Guimarães de Andrade Landell  4 , Monalisa Sampaio Carneiro 5 , Thiago Willian Balsalobre 5 , Marcos Gonçalves Quiles 6 , Welison Andrade Pereira 7 , Gabriel Rodrigues Alves Margarido  2  and Anete Pereira de Souza 1,8 *

1   Center for Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering (CBMEG), University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil, 2 Department of Genetics, Luiz de Queiroz College of Agriculture (ESALQ), University of São Paulo (USP), Piracicaba, Brazil, 3   Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Computational Genomics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,  4   Advanced Center of Sugarcane Agrobusiness Technological Research, Agronomic Institute of Campinas (IAC), Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 5   Departamento de Biotecnologia e Produção Vegetal e Animal, Centro de Ciências Agrárias, Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCar), São Carlos, Brazil, 6 Instituto de Ciência e Tecnologia (ICT), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (Unifesp), São José dos Campos, Brazil,  7   Department of Biology, Federal University of Lavras (UFLA), Lavras, Brazil, 8 Department of Plant Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil

The protein kinase (PK) superfamily is one of the largest superfamilies in plants and the core regulator of cellular signaling. Despite this substantial importance, the kinomes of sugarcane and sorghum have not been profiled. Here, we identified and profiled the complete kinomes of the polyploid Saccharum spontaneum (Ssp) and Sorghum bicolor (Sbi), a close diploid relative. The Sbi kinome was composed of 1,210 PKs; for Ssp, we identified 2,919 PKs when disregarding duplications and allelic copies, and these were related to 1,345 representative gene models. The Ssp and Sbi PKs were grouped into 20  groups  and  120  subfamilies  and  exhibited  high  compositional  similarities  and evolutionary divergences. By utilizing the collinearity between the species, this study offers insights into Sbi and Ssp speciation, PK differentiation and selection. We assessed the PK subfamily expression profiles via RNA-Seq and identified significant similarities between Sbi and Ssp. Moreover, coexpression networks allowed inference of a core structure of kinase interactions with specific key elements. This study provides the first categorization of the allelic specificity of a kinome and offers a wide reservoir of molecular and genetic information, thereby enhancing the understanding of Sbi and Ssp PK evolutionary history.

Keywords: coexpression networks, kinase gene family, phylogenetic analyses, RNA-Seq, Saccharum spontaneum , Sorghum bicolor

## INTRODUCTION

Sugarcane  is  one  of  the  world's  most  important  crops,  with the  highest  production  quantity  and  the  sixth  highest  net production  value  in  2016  (FAO,  2020).  For  years,  this  crop has  accounted  for  approximately  80%  of  the  worldwide  sugar production  (ISO,  2020)  and  is  predicted  to  account  for  nearly 40%  of  the  planet's  first-generation  biofuel  supply  in  the  near future  (Lalman  et  al.,  2016).  However,  it  is  also  known  for its  unprecedented genomic complexity; modern cultivars arose from  interspecific  crosses  between  two  autopolyploid  species, namely Saccharum officinarum (2 n =  8x  =  80, x =  10;  D'Hont et  al.,  1998)  and  the  wild Saccharum  spontaneum (2 n =  5x =40  to  16x  =  128; x =  8;  Panje  and  Babu,  1960).  These hybridizations  produced  large  ( ∼ 10  Gb),  highly  polyploid  and aneuploid  genomes  (Sforça  et  al.,  2019).

Sugarcane  genomic  research  is  hampered  by  this  genomic complexity,  and  for  many  years,  depended  on  resources  from a  closely  related  species:  sorghum  ( Sorghum  bicolor ). S.  bicolor (Sbi)  is  a  stress-resistant,  multifunctional  cereal  crop  that  is primarily grown as a staple food in Africa but can also be used for  fodder,  sugar,  and  biofuel  production  (Serna-Saldívar  et  al., 2012). Saccharum and Sorghum belong to the Saccharinae subtribe of the Poaceae family (Clayton, 1987); however, unlike sugarcane, Sorghum has not undergone recent polyploidization events ( ∼ 96 million  years;  Guo  et  al.,  2019)  and  thus  has  a  diploid  and much smaller genome that was fully sequenced in 2009 (Paterson et  al.,  2009).  Due  to  both  the  evolutionary  proximity  between the  two  species  and  the  extensive  collinearity  between  their chromosomes, sorghum has historically been considered a diploid model  for  sugarcane  (Grivet  and  Arruda,  2002).

The  superfamily  of  protein  kinases  (PKs)  comprises  the enzymes responsible for catalyzing the reversible phosphorylation of  proteins  -  one  of  the  most  widespread  posttranslational modifications across all living organisms. PKs act by transferring the terminal phosphate group from ATP to the hydroxyl group of  a  serine,  threonine,  or  tyrosine  residue  in  the  target  protein (Hunter,  1995).  These  reactions  are  key  events  regulating  the activity and interactions of proteins; therefore, PKs are relevant in  many  cellular  and  metabolic  processes  (Champion  et  al., 2004). In plants, they are involved in the regulation of circadian rhythms and cell cycles, the modulation of various developmental and  intracellular  processes,  and  the  control  of  cellular  cycles and metabolism (Lehti-Shiu and Shiu, 2012). PKs also participate in responses to drought, heat, and metal toxicity (Hasanuzzaman, 2020) and in the defense responses to herbivores and pathogens (Falco  et  al.,  2001;  Meng  and  Zhang,  2013).  Several  of  these responses  are  predicted  to  become  increasingly  relevant  in agriculture as a result of climate  change;  indeed,  extreme temperatures  and  drought  are  obvious  threats  from  global warming  (Dai,  2013;  Teixeira  et  al.,  2013).  Moreover,  pest control is also prone to become more challenging with climate instability (Gregory et al., 2009). Therefore, the study of molecules and  processes  associated  with  both  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses is  highly  relevant  to  the  current  setting  (Ahuja  et  al.,  2010).

Dardick  et  al.  (2007)  noted  that  phylogenomic  studies  are particularly  valuable  in  the  analysis  of  large  and  conserved gene  groups  such  as  PKs  because  of  their  ability  to  form  a basis  for  functional  predictions  and  permit  the  identification of  genes  with  unique  properties,  which  can  in  turn  allow rational  selection  of  candidates  for  more  detailed  studies.  The first  works  on  the  classification  of  PKs  were  based  on  the conservation  and  phylogenetic  analyses  of  catalytic  domains of  eukaryotic  proteins  (Hanks and Hunter, 1995). Later studies also considered sequence similarity and domain structure outside the  catalytic  domains  in  categorization  (Manning  et  al.,  2002; Niedner et al., 2006). More recently, the availability of low-cost technologies  for  sequencing  whole  genomes  have  allowed  the characterization  of  species'  kinomes,  i.e.,  their  entire  repertoire of  PKs.  Compared  to  the  human  genome,  plant  genomes generally contain not only many more PK genes but also atypical kinase families -either exclusive to plant  genomes  or  of prokaryotic origin (Zulawski and Schulze, 2015). This expansion likely  resulted  from  segmental,  whole-genome,  and  tandem duplication  events  (Hanada  et  al.,  2008). Arabidopsis  thaliana was  the  first  plant  to  have  its  kinome  compiled  (Champion et  al.,  2004),  followed  by  several  other  economically  important species (Dardick et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2018b).

Several studies have characterized kinases in sugarcane. The broadest  study  is  likely  that  conducted  by  Papini-Terzi  et  al. (2005), who identified sequences corresponding to signal transduction components in the sugarcane expressed sequence tag  database  (Vettore  et  al.,  2003).  Although  they  obtained substantial  results  considering  the  limited  resources  available at  the  time,  these  researchers  reported  a  relatively  low  number of  PKs.  Other  studies  have  revealed  that  sugarcane  PKs  are involved in this plant's development and response to environmental  stimuli  (Carraro  et  al.,  2001;  Pagariya  et  al., 2012;  Li  et  al.,  2017).  Even  more  relevant  is  the  compelling evidence  that  a  leucine-rich  repeat  (LRR)  receptor-like  kinase is related to sucrose-accumulating sugarcane tissues and genotypes,  which  indicates  its  involvement  in  the  regulation of  sucrose  synthesis  (Vicentini  et  al.,  2009).  However,  a  more comprehensive  characterization  of  sugarcane  PKs  has  not  yet been  performed.  Recently,  a  high-quality,  chromosome-level genome  assembly  for  sugarcane  was  made  available  (Zhang et al., 2018). The assembly of the genome of the S.  spontaneum (Ssp)  AP85-441  clone  (2 n =  4x  =  32)  is  also  allele-defined, i.e., it provides separate sequences of each of the four chromosome copies  (haplotypes).  Therefore,  each  gene  can  show  up  to  four alleles (Zhang et al., 2018, 2019b; Li et al., 2020). The availability of  this  information-rich  reference  has  since  opened  a  range of possibilities  in  sugarcane  research,  such  as  the  detailed characterization  of  specific  groups  of  genes.  Since  polyploidy may  result  in  chromosome  rearrangements,  gene  loss,  and unequal rates of sequence evolution and can favor gene neofunctionalization (Premachandran et al., 2011), the sugarcane genome  provides  fertile  ground  for  related  evolutionary  and functional  studies.

In  this  context,  the  main  objective  of  this  work  was  to identify  and  classify  the  complete  set  of  PKs  present  in  the Ssp and Sbi genomes. For this purpose, we performed phylogenetic analyses and in silico predictions of the properties of  these  proteins.  Taking  advantage  of  the  completeness  of  the

available information, we explored the impact of whole-genome and tandem duplications in the distribution and diversification of  the  genes  encoding  PKs  in  the  genomes  of  the  two  plants. Finally, we constructed coexpression  networks  using  RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to evaluate the expression of PK-encoding genes across different sugarcane and sorghum tissues and  genotypes.

## MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

## Kinase Identification and Domain Investigation

All  kinase  identification  procedures  were  performed  for  both Sbi  and  Ssp.  The  Sbi  protein-coding  gene  sequences  and additional  files  from  the  Sbi  genome  (v3.1.1)  were  obtained from  Phytozome  v.13  (Goodstein  et  al.,  2012).  Ssp  data  were obtained  from  the  AP85-441  genome  (Zhang  et  al.,  2018). The  Ssp  reference  contains  information  at  the  allele  level, considering the most conserved allele among all allelic copies and  paralog/tandem  duplications  of  each  gene  to  represent it  as  a  'gene  model'  (GM).  In  this  assembly,  the  first  part of a gene accession number refers to the GM; the last number refers  to  order  of  the  allele;  and  the  last  letter  may  refer  to the  allelic  copy  (haplotypes  A-D),  it  belongs  to  or  indicate that  the  gene  is  tandemly  (T)  or  dispersedly  (P)  duplicated. For Ssp, we identified PK genes in two ways: first, disregarding allelic  relationships  among  genes;  and  secondly,  considering their  organization  into  GMs.  All  sequences  obtained  were aligned against the 'typical' Pkinase (PF00069) and Pkinase\_Tyr (PF07714)  families  with  hidden  Markov  models  (HMMs) retrieved from the Pfam database (El-Gebali et al., 2019) using HMMER  v.3.3  (Eddy,  1998).  An E -value  cutoff  of  0.1  was used,  and  we  retained  only  sequences  that  covered  at  least 50%  of  the  respective  Pkinase  domain.  To  avoid  redundancy, we  selected  only  the  longest  variant  for  genes  with  isoforms. The domain composition of the putative PKs was also investigated via the  HMMER  web  server  (Finn  et  al.,  2011) and  Pfam  database.  The  distribution  of  PKs  across  the  Sbi and  Ssp  chromosomes  was  visualized  using  MapChart  v2.2 software  (Voorrips,  2002).

## Subfamily Classification and Phylogenetic Analyses

All  PKs  identified  were  classified  into  subfamilies  according to  HMMs built based on a previous classification and analyses of  kinases  of  25  plant  species  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012): Aquilegia  coerulea (Aco), Arabidopsis  lyrata (Aly), A.  thaliana (Ath), Brachypodium  distachyon (Bdi), Carica  papaya (Cpa), Citrus  clementina (Ccl), Citrus  sinensis (Csi), Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Cre), Cucumis  sativus (Csa), Eucalyptus  grandis (Egr), Glycine  max (Gma), Manihot  esculenta (Mes), Medicago truncatula (Mtr), Mimulus guttatus (Mgu), Oryza sativa (Osa), Populus  trichocarpa (Ptr), Prunus  persica (Ppe), Physcomitrella patens (Ppa), Ricinus communis (Rco), Selaginella moellendorffii (Smo), Setaria  italica (Sit), Vitis  vinifera (Vvi), Volvox  carteri

(Vca), Zea  mays (Zma),  and  an  earlier  version  of  the  Sbi genome, which we called v.1. Each Ssp and Sbi protein, previously identified  as  a  putative  kinase,  was  aligned  against  all  these subfamily  HMMs  and  considered  as  part  of  the  top-scoring subfamily ( E -value cutoff of 0.1). This classification was confirmed through  phylogenetic  analyses.  The  Pkinase  domains  of  the putative PKs were aligned using Muscle v.3.8.31 (Edgar, 2004), and  a  phylogenetic  tree  was  estimated  using  a  maximum likelihood approach implemented in FastTreeMP v2.1.10 (Price et  al.,  2010)  with  1,000  bootstrap  replicates  using  the  CIPRES gateway  (Miller  et  al.,  2010).  Different  trees  were  constructed for  PKs  from  Sbi;  PKs  from  Ssp;  and  PKs  from  both  Sbi  and Ssp. The dendrogram was visualized using R statistical software (R  Core  Team,  2013)  with  the  ggtree  (Yu  et  al.,  2017)  and ggplot2  (Villanueva  and  Chen,  2019)  packages.

## Kinase Characterization

For  each  PK  identified,  the  following  characteristics  were determined:  gene  chromosomal  location  and  intron  number, using GFF files; predicted subcellular localization, with WoLF PSORT (Horton  et  al.,  2007),  CELLO  v.2.5  (Yu  et  al.,  2006) and LOCALIZER v.1.0.4 (Sperschneider et al., 2017) programs; presence  of  N-terminal  signal  peptides,  using  SignalP  v.4.1 Server  (Petersen  et  al.,  2011);  presence  of  transmembrane domains,  using  TMHMM  v.2.0  Server  (Krogh  et  al.,  2001); and Gene Ontology (GO) categories (Ashburner et al., 2000), using the Blast2GO  tool  (Conesa  et  al., 2005)  with  the SWISS-PROT  (Bairoch  and  Apweiler,  2000)  and  UniProt (UniProt Consortium, 2007) databases. For Sbi PKs, alternative splicing (AS) events were investigated using the Plant Alternative  Splicing  Database  (Min,  2013;  Min  et  al.,  2015). The  comparison  of  these  characteristics  and  calculation  of descriptive  statistics  were  performed  with  R.  Analysis  and visualization  of  GO  categories  were  performed  using  the REViGO  tool  (Supek  et  al.,  2011).

## Duplication Events

To  investigate  PK  duplication  events,  we  used  the  Multiple Collinearity Scan (MCScanX) toolkit (Wang et al., 2012). Tandem duplications  were  visualized  with  MapChart,  and  segmental events  were  visualized  with  Circos  software  (Krzywinski  et  al., 2009). Synonymous  substitution ( Ks ) and  nonsynonymous substitution ( Ka ) rates were also estimated for segmental duplications using MCScanX (Wang et al., 2012), and Ks values were used to estimate the date of duplication events: T = Ks /2 λ , where λ is the mean value of the clock-like rates of synonymous substitutions  (6.5  ×  10 -9 ;  Gaut  et  al.,  1996).

## RNA-Seq Experiments

Data from several RNA-Seq experiments were used to estimate kinase expression, as summarized in Table 1 .  Sbi  datasets were retrieved from NCBI's Sequence Read Archive (SRA; Leinonen et  al.,  2010)  and  are  described  in Supplementary  Table  1 . Samples  from  different  tissues  and  varieties  were  used  (Dugas et al., 2011; Freeling et al., 2015; Makita et al., 2015; Kebrom  et  al., 2017; Varoquaux  et  al., 2019). To  analyze

TABLE 1  | Information on samples used for RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) experiments.

| Sugarcane      | Sugarcane         | Sugarcane            |
|----------------|-------------------|----------------------|
| Species        | Genotype          | Tissue               |
| S. officinarum | Badila De Java    | Culms                |
| S. officinarum | Criolla Rayada    | Leaves               |
| S. officinarum | White Transparent | Leaves               |
| S. robustum    | IJ76-318          | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-58           | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-88           | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | Krakatau          | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | SES205A           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | F36-819           | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | IACSP93-3046      | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | R570              | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB72454           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855113          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855156          | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855536          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB867515          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB92579           | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP79-1011         | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP80-3280         | Culms, leaves, roots |
| Saccharum sp.  | TUC71-7           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | US85-1008         | Leaves               |

## Sorgum

| Species         | Genotype   | Tissue                                                                       |
|-----------------|------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Pollen, microspore, roots, ligule epidermial tissue, blade epidermial tissue |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Roots, shoots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Seeds, spikelets, top internodes                                             |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX642     | Leaves, roots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | R.07020    | Internodes 1-4                                                               |
| Sorghum bicolor | RTX430     | Leaves, roots                                                                |

sugarcane  kinase  expression,  we  used  one  published  and  three novel  RNA-Seq  datasets  described  in  the  following  section.

## Sugarcane  Plant  Material  and  RNA-Seq

Sugarcane  hybrids  and S.  officinarum and  Ssp  clones  were  used for expression analyses in sugarcane. Four independent experiments were  performed  and  are  detailed  in Supplementary  Table  2 . Experiment  1  was  based  on  root  material  from  the  RB867515, RB92579, RB855113, RB855536, SP79-1011, and SP80-3280 hybrid cultivars.  This  trial  was  carried  out  in  a  greenhouse  with  three replicates per cultivar in a completely randomized design. Plants were grown in 18-L plastic pots with a mixture of 20% commercial planting  mix  and  80%  sand.  Ninety-five  days  after  planting, we sampled the root material of each plant, avoiding tiller roots.

Experiments  2  and  3  were  performed  with  leaf  and  culm (internode  1)  samples,  respectively,  from  plants  grown  in  the field  in  Araras,  Brazil  (22 ° 18 ' 41.0 '' and  23 ' 05.0 '' W,  at  an altitude  of  611  m).  Leaf  samples  were  collected  from  portions of the top visible dewlap leaves (+1) of 6-month-old sugarcane plants  in  April  2016.  We  collected  the  middle  section  of  each leaf,  removing  the  midrib.  For  culms,  samples  from  the  first internode  were  collected  at  four  time  points  in  2016:  April (synchronous  with  leaf  sampling),  June,  August,  and  October.

In Experiment 2, described by Correr et al. (2020), we used samples  from  the  SP80-3280,  RB72454,  and  RB855156  hybrid cultivars; TUC71-7 and US85-1008 hybrids; White Transparent and Criolla Rayada S. officinarum genotypes; IN84-58, IN84-88, Krakatau, and SES205A Ssp genotypes; and IJ76-318 Saccharum robustum genotypes.  For  six  genotypes  -  SP80-3280,  RB72454, US85-1008, White Transparent, IN84-58, and SES205A -we  collected  and  sequenced  three  biological  replicates,  while the  others  were  represented  by  one  biological  replicate;  all samples  were  represented  by  three  technical  replicates.  Leaf samples  were  sequenced  in  two  lanes.  In  Experiment  3,  culm samples  were  collected  from  the  SP80-3280  and  R570  hybrid cultivars, F36-819 hybrid, and IN84-58 S. spontaneum genotype. Culm  samples  were  sequenced  in  six  lanes.

Experiment  4  was  based  on  samples  from  the  SP80-3280 and IACSP93-3046 hybrid cultivars, Badila De Java S. officinarum genotype,  and  Krakatau  Ssp  genotype.  RNA  samples  were extracted  in  triplicate  from  the  top  (internode  3)  and  bottom (internode  8)  culms  and  collected  in  the  field  in  Ribeirão Preto,  Brazil  (21 ° 12 ' 28.7 '' S,  47 ° 52 ' 29.1 '' W)  in  June  2016.

After  collection,  samples  were  immediately  frozen  in  liquid nitrogen  and  stored  at -80 ° C  until  processed.  Total  RNA  was extracted  from  200  mg  of  ground  roots  and  50  mg  of  ground leaves or culms using an RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,  United  States).  We  quantified  the  RNA  and  verified  its integrity  in  a  2100  BioAnalyzer  using  a  Eukaryote  Total  RNA Nano Assay (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States). A total of 300 ng of RNA per sample was used to prepare cDNA libraries  with  a  TruSeq  Stranded  mRNA  LT  Kit  (Illumina,  San Diego, CA, United States). Libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 platform  (Illumina,  San  Diego,  CA,  United  States).

## RNA-Seq Data Processing and Coexpression Network Construction

The  quality  of  the  RNA-Seq  data  was  assessed  using  FastQC software (Andrews, 2010). For read filtering and adapter removal, we  used  Trimmomatic  v.0.39  (Bolger  et  al.,  2014).  In  the  Sbi and sugarcane datasets, bases with Phred scores below 20 were removed,  and  reads  shorter  than  30  bp  were  filtered  out.  In the  sugarcane  datasets,  we  also  removed  the  first  12  bases  of each read and increased the filter length to 75 bp. For transcript quantification,  we  used  the  DNA  coding  sequences  (CDSs) from each species  as  reference,  with  k-mers  of  lengths  31  and 17  for  Ssp  and  Sbi,  respectively,  in  Salmon  v.1.1.0  software (Patro et al., 2015). PK expression quantification was evaluated with transcripts per million (TPM) values. Heatmaps visualizing the expression of kinase subfamilies among tissues and cultivars were  generated  using  the  R  package  pheatmap  (Kolde  and Kolde, 2015) with average TPM values and a complete-linkage hierarchical  clustering  approach  based  on  Euclidean  distances.

Coexpression networks were estimated for PK subfamilies using a  minimum  Pearson  correlation  coefficient  of  0.6  between  PK quantifications across different subfamilies. Network analyses were performed using the R package igraph (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006).

To  assess  the  Ssp  and  Sbi  network  structures,  hub  scores  for each subfamily were calculated considering Kleinberg's hub centrality scores  (Kleinberg,  1999),  edge  betweenness  values  estimated  by the  number  of  geodesics  passing  through  the  edge  (Brandes, 2001), and communities defined using a propagating label approach (Raghavan  et  al.,  2007).

## RESULTS

## Genome-Wide Identification of PKs in Sugarcane and Sorghum

Using the established bioinformatic pipeline, we  identified 2,919 putative Ssp and 1,210 putative Sbi PKs ( Supplementary  Tables  3 and 4 ),  which  were  classified  into groups and subfamilies according to the top-scoring correspondence  to  HMMs  of  25  plant  species  (Lehti-Shiu  and Shiu,  2012; Supplementary  Tables  5 and 6 )  and  phylogenetic approaches  ( Supplementary  Figures  1-3 ),  as  fully  described in Supplementary Results (Genome-Wide Identification of PKs in  Sugarcane  and  Sorghum  section).  Similar  to  other  kinomes (Singh  et  al.,  2014;  Wei  et  al.,  2014;  Zulawski  et  al.,  2014;  Liu et  al.,  2015;  Y an  et  al.,  2017,  2018;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b),  the most  abundant  group  in  both  species  was  the  receptor-like kinase  (RLK)-Pelle  group  ( Figure  1 ),  which  accounted  for ∼ 70%  of  the  PKs,  followed  by  the  calcium-  and  calmodulinregulated  kinase  (CAMK);  cyclin-dependent  kinase,  mitogenactivated  protein  kinase,  glycogen  synthase  kinase,  and  cyclindependent  kinase-like kinase (CMGC);  tyrosine  kinase-like kinase (TKL); serine/threonine kinase (STE); and cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (cAPK), cGMP-dependent protein kinase,  and  lipid  signaling  kinase  families  (AGC);  and  casein kinase  1  (CK1)  groups.  This  expansion  in  the  Sbi  and  Ssp kinomes  is  apparently  related  to  a  few  specific  families  within the group, most notably LRR, RLCK, DLSV, L-LEC, and SD-2b. These families have been associated with the increased number of  kinases  in  RLK-Pelle  (Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b),  mostly  because of their relationship to biotic and  abiotic stress  responses (Dezhsetan, 2017). The subfamily abundances obtained for Ssp

<!-- image -->

and Sbi were similar, and only the pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha kinase (PEK\_PEK) subfamily was exclusive to Sbi.

We compared the subfamily quantities to other plant species (Lehti-Shiu and Shiu, 2012). The heatmap ( Supplementary  Figure  4 )  visualizing  the  similarities  in  the numbers of  PKs  indicated  a  closeness  between  the  Ssp  and  Sbi kinase compositions; however, both exhibited closer relationships with other species than with each other.  The  dendrogram constructed  based  on  the  columns  (plant  species)  enabled  the identification  of  the  species  most  similar  to  Sbi  and  Ssp  in terms  of  PK  quantities.  Sbi  was  found  to  belong  to  a  cohesive clade  with  Zma,  Bdi,  and  Sbi  v.1,  and  Ssp  belonged  to  a  clade with  Sit  and  Osa.  Interestingly,  although  the  two  groups  were separated  by  other  species,  together,  they  corresponded  to  all of  the  monocotyledon  species  under  comparison.

A full characterization of Ssp and Sbi PKs is described  in Supplementary Results (Characterization  of  PKs section) and summarized in Figure 2 , including their chromosome  distribution  ( Supplementary  Tables  8 and 9 ), intron organization ( Supplementary Tables 10 and 11 ), domain composition  ( Supplementary  Tables  12-17 ),  GO  annotation ( Supplementary  Tables  18 and 19; Supplementary  Figure  5 ) and protein properties, including the presence of signal peptides and transmembrane helices in the PKs, their estimated molecular weights (MWs), theoretical isoelectric points (pIs), and subcellular localizations  ( Supplementary  Tables  20 and 21 ).  All  these attributes of PKs are summarized at subfamily level in Supplementary  Tables  22 (Sbi)  and 23 (Ssp),  with  domain composition  described  in Supplementary  Tables  24 and 25 .

## Kinase Duplication Events in Sugarcane and Sorghum

Gene  duplications  in  Sbi  and  Ssp  kinases  were  investigated using MCScanX. We identified numerous kinase genes (1,165 in Sbi  and  2,919  in  Ssp)  that  originated  from  dispersed  (7.73% in  Sbi  and  1.68%  in  Ssp),  proximal  (3.18%  in  Sbi  and  1.88% in Ssp), tandem (10.04% in Sbi and 8.94% in Ssp), and segmental duplications (78.97% in Sbi and 87.43% in Ssp; Supplementary Tables 26 and 27 ). Ssp PKs with origins related

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Non-RLK Group

Non-RLK Group

FIGURE 1  | Phylogenetic analyses of putative protein kinases (PKs) identified in the Saccharum spontaneum (Ssp) and Sorghum bicolor (Sbi) genomes. (A) Phylogenetic tree of the 1,210 Sbi PKs organized in 120 subfamilies represented by different colors. (B) Phylogenetic tree of the 2,919 Ssp PKs organized in 119 subfamilies. (C) Phylogenetic tree of PKs in both Sbi and Ssp.

FIGURE 2  | Descriptive analysis of kinase characteristics in Ssp (A,C) and Sbi (B,D) : chromosomal distribution, intron length and chromosomal occurrence, presence of signal peptides, molecular weights (MWs), isoelectric points (pIs), Gene Ontology (GO) terms, subcellular localization, and presence of transmembrane helices.

<!-- image -->

to  tandem  duplications  were  unevenly  distributed  across  all allele  copies  on  chromosomes  (ranging  from  two  events  on Chr4-B to 16 events on Chr3-A). All Sbi chromosomes contained PKs  that  originated  from  tandem  duplications,  ranging  from one  PK  in  chromosome  4  to  26  on  both  chromosomes  2 and  3  ( Figure 3A ).  By  analyzing  the  tandemly  duplicated  PKs within  subfamilies,  we  found  19  subfamilies  containing  PKs that originated from tandem duplication. The highest percentages

FIGURE 3  | Kinase distribution along (A) S. spontaneum and (B) S. bicolor chromosomes. For each chromosome, all genes with kinase domains are indicated on the left, and only the tandemly organized kinases are indicated on the right, colored and labeled according to the subfamily classification.

<!-- image -->

of  such  Sbi  PKs  were  found  in  the  RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-Os, RLK-Pelle\_LRR-I-1,  CMGC\_CDKL-Os,  RLK-Pelle\_LRK10L-2, and CMGC\_CK2 subfamilies ( Figure 3B ). In Ssp 64 subfamilies had  tandemly  duplicated  PKs,  and  the  five  subfamilies  with the highest percentages  were  RLK-Pelle\_RKF3,  RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-VIII-1, CAMK\_CAMK1-DCAMKL, RLK-Pelle\_LRR-XIIIb, and  TKL\_Gdt.  In  Ssp  the  distribution  of  PKs  did  not  exhibit a  clear  pattern  along  chromosomes  ( Figure  3A ).  In  Sbi,  these were  concentrated  in  subtelomeric  regions  and  were  almost nonexistent in pericentromeric regions ( Figure 3B ). This pattern was  observed  more  clearly  when  only  tandemly  distributed Sbi  PKs  were  considered.  We  also  performed  a  GO  analysis to  determine  the  categories  related  to  tandemly  duplicated kinases.  The  GO  terms  describing  the  biological  processes  of these proteins were similar between Ssp and Sbi ( Figures 4A,B ), and  considerable  correspondences  with  the  total  number  of GO  terms  related  to  the  entire  set  of  PKs  were  observed ( Supplementary  Figures  5A,B ).

Segmental  duplications  accounted  for  the  highest  percentage of  identified  duplication  types  in  both  Sbi  and  Ssp  PKs.  The highest  quantities  in  Ssp  were  observed  in  the  allelic  copies  of chromosomes  1  and  2,  which  also  contained  the  most  PKs.  In Sbi,  chromosome  1  exhibited  the  most  segmental  duplications, although  chromosome  3  had  the  most  PK  genes.  For  all  gene pairs  within  these  collinear  duplications,  we  calculated  the Ka and Ks values  to  obtain  a  time  indicator  of  these  events  and evaluated  the  primary  influence  of  PK  expansion  by  calculating the Ka / Ks ratio.  We  considered  each  gene  pair  to  be  under neutral  ( Ka / Ks =  1),  negative  ( Ka / Ks &lt;  1)  or  positive  selection ( Ka / Ks &gt;  1;  Zhang  et  al.,  2006). Ks values  were  clearly  more evenly distributed in Sbi than in Ssp ( Supplementary Figures 6A,B and Supplementary Tables 28 and 29 ), which had 1,287 (27.5%) segmentally  duplicated  PKs  with  a Ks of  &lt;  0.05.  We  used Ks values  to  estimate  the  occurrence  times  of  these  duplications; the times ranged between 0 and 230.1 million years ago (MYA) in  Ssp  with  an  average  of  45.6  MYA,  and  between  4.9  and 229.7 MYA in Sbi, with an average of 96.8 MYA. Most segmental duplications  with Ks &lt;  0.05  in  Ssp  were  estimated  to  have occurred less than 3.83 MYA. Regarding the Ka / Ks ratio, we found the largest percentage of gene pairs as likely to be under negative selection  in  both  species  ( ∼ 86%  in  Ssp  and ∼ 88%  in  Sbi).

The segmental events among alleles had different configurations,  but  in  most  duplications,  the  order  of  PKs  on one allele was retained on the other allele ( Figure 5A ). Syntenic blocks  between  chromosomes  were  much  more  frequent  in Ssp  ( Figure  5B )  than  in  Sbi  ( Figure  5C ),  mainly  due  to  the allele  specificity  of  Ssp.  The  duplication  patterns  were  similar between Ssp and Sbi, as shown in Figure 5D ,  where the kinase genomic correspondences indicate the increased synteny between the two species. In most subfamilies, the origin of most PKs was characterized by segmental duplications (109 and 115 subfamilies in Sbi and Ssp respectively; Supplementary Tables 22 and 23 ). Interestingly,  four  subfamilies  in  Ssp  and  eight  subfamilies  in Sbi  did  not  contain  any  PKs  that  originated  from  segmental duplications  ( Supplementary  Tables  22 and 23 ).

For  Ssp  we  performed  additional  analyses  to  assess  the distribution  of  kinase  copies  among  alleles  and  investigated possible  associations  among  alleles,  duplications,  and  domains ( Figure  6 ).  Each  Ssp  GM  can  have  up  to  four  allelic  copies, depending on the genomic organization of the gene. Subfamilies with larger numbers of PKs had a more dispersed organizational profile  in  terms  of  the  number  of  allelic  copies  per  GM. Subfamilies  with  fewer  GMs,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  have a uniform configuration. These subfamilies constitute the majority of  the  Ssp  kinome  [ ∼ 60% of the subfamilies  had  five  or  fewer representative  GMs,  and  33  subfamilies  ( ∼ 30%)  had  only  one GM]. Even with the few related proteins, these small subfamilies did not exhibit similar characteristics. Only three of these GMs had  copies  on  the  four  alleles,  whereas  10,  9,  and  11  GMs contained  copies  on  three  alleles,  two  alleles,  and  only  one allele  (three  in  allelic  model  A,  three  in  B,  two  in  C,  and three in D), respectively. More tandem and segmental duplications were  observed  in  subfamilies  with  more  elements,  but  this pattern  did  not  hold  for  the  quantity  of  functional  domains and  multikinase  domains  ( Figure  6 ).

## Estimates of Kinase Expression and Construction of Coexpression Networks

Quantification of kinase expression in Sbi and Ssp was performed via a  wide  variety  of  datasets  comprising  different  tissues  and genotypes. From the CDS quantifications, we separated the subset of  kinase  coding  genes. Via TPM  values,  Sbi  kinase  expression was  quantified  in  205  samples  ( Supplementary  Table  30 );  Ssp kinase expression, in 234 ( Supplementary Table 31 ). To quantify expression  at  the  subfamily  level,  the  TPM  values  for  all  PK members in a subfamily were averaged in each sample ( Supplementary Tables 32 and 33 ).  However, most experiments contained several replicates, and the sample TPM values were also averaged  to  separately  represent  the  unique  characteristics  of  a tissue from a specific genotype ( Supplementary Tables 34 and 35 ).

The expression quantification of Ssp and Sbi kinase subfamilies was visualized with a heatmap ( Figure 7 ). There was a noticeable division of the columns into five groups, as was also identified by  the  total  within  sum  of  squares  using  a  range  of  group configurations (2-10). The groups were separated into sugarcane samples from internodes and roots; Sbi samples from internodes, roots,  and spikelets; Sbi samples from epidermal tissues, seeds, and  microspores;  Sbi  and  sugarcane  samples  from  leaves  and shoots;  and  Sbi  samples  from  pollen.  The  expression  patterns of  kinase  subfamilies  were  more  similar  among  similar  tissues from different species. However, these clusters contained subdivisions  supporting  the  species  specificities.

The differences in subfamily expression profiles were investigated further. For each subfamily, we calculated the dispersion of expression among genotypes and tissues using the SD and coefficient of variation ( Supplementary  Tables  36 and 37 ).  The  divergence  of  these measures  among  tissues  was  high  in  Sbi,  as  observed  in  the heatmap  and  indicated  by  the  high  values  of  the  coefficient of  variation  (ranging  from ∼ 38  to ∼ 297%).  In  Ssp  on  the other hand, 16 subfamilies exhibited relatively uniform expression patterns  in  the  analyzed  samples  (with  coefficient  of  variation of less than  or  equal  to 20%).  This  difference  is possibly explained  by  the  greater  diversity  of  tissues  used  for  Sbi  than

FIGURE 4  | Gene Ontology (GO) categories (biological processes) related to tandemly duplicated kinases in (A) S. spontaneum and (B) Sbi. The size of the subdivisions within the blocks represents the abundance of that category in this set of kinases. The colors are related to the similarity to a representative GO annotation for the group.

<!-- image -->

for  Ssp.  To  identify  subfamilies  with  the  highest  and  lowest expression  values,  we  calculated  additional  statistical  measures to summarize the distribution of TPM values in each subfamily (i.e., minimum, maximum, mean, and 1st, 2nd, and 3rd quartiles).

We selected 12 subfamilies (10% of the dataset) with the highest and  lowest  values  of  all  these  measures.  We  considered  a subfamily  as  having  the  highest  or  lowest  expression  values  if that  subfamily  was  ranked  in  at  least  four  of  the  six  measures.

FIGURE 5  | Segmental duplication events in the Ssp and Sbi genomes, divided into (A) Ssp duplications between alleles on the same chromosome, with the colors representing the origin of the duplication (green for allele A , orange for allele B , and brown for allele C ). (B) Ssp duplications between chromosomes, excluding events between alleles on the same chromosome; and (C) Sbi duplications. The colors in (B,C) indicate the selection type of the gene pair duplication (orange indicates negative selection; light blue, positive selection; and yellow, neutral selection). (D) Representation of kinase correspondences between Sbi and Ssp., indicating the synteny relationships among these species.

<!-- image -->

We identified 8 and 12 subfamilies in Sbi and Ssp respectively, with the highest expression patterns in the dataset. Surprisingly, three of these subfamilies (CK1\_CK1, CMGC\_GSK,  and CMGC\_RCK) had the highest expression value in both species. Importantly,  in  addition  to  being  overexpressed  in  Sbi,  the members  of  the  CMGC\_GSK  subfamily  also  contain  many functional  domains,  which  might  reflect  their  high  expression. Another  overexpressed  subfamily  in  the  Sbi  kinome  (but  not in Ssp) was CMGC\_MAPK, which has previously been associated with  stress  signaling  in  Ssp  and  Sbi  (Zhang  et  al.,  2015;  Li et  al.,  2016b;  Paungfoo-Lonhienne  et  al.,  2016;  Srivastava  and Kumar, 2020; Tuleski et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). Although their expression values were significantly increased, these subfamilies  did  not  contain  the  highest  numbers  of  kinases.

Using  this  approach,  eight  and  nine  subfamilies  in  Ssp  and Sbi, respectively, with the lowest expression values were identified with  two  overlaps  (CMGC\_CDKL-Os and RLK-Pelle\_URK-3). RLK-Pelle\_URK-3  had  only  one  kinase  member  in  both  the Sbi  and  Ssp  kinomes;  however,  CMGC\_CDKL-Os  had  37  and 23  kinases  in  Ssp  and  Sbi,  respectively.  The  apparent  lack  of a  correlation  between  the  expression  values  and  the  numbers of kinases in the subfamilies was also evidenced by any combination  of  genotype/tissue  with  a  significant  Spearman correlation  coefficient  ( Supplementary  Tables  38 and 39 ).

Together,  the  dendrogram  and  the  heatmap  indicate  the presence of groups of subfamilies with high similarities, whose expression  patterns  changed  jointly  according  to  the  tissue/ genotype. Collectively considering all Sbi and Ssp quantifications,

<!-- image -->

we evaluated their similarities through correlation analysis. The strongest correlations were higher than 0.97 for the two subfamily pairs RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-Os/RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-VIIa-2 and RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-VIIa-2/RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-X.  To  complement the  assessment  of  the  similarities  in  RNA  expression  among the subfamilies, we constructed coexpression networks for each species  based  on  the  expression  correlation  among  samples  in each subfamily ( Figure 8 ). Each node in the network represents

FIGURE 7  | RNA expression profiles of S. spontaneum and S. bicolor , shown on a heatmap indicating the average sample values of different combinations of genotypes and tissues (columns) and considering the organization of kinase subfamilies (rows).

<!-- image -->

a  different  subfamily  (the  node  sizes  represent  the  mean  of the expression values within the subfamily), and each connection has a minimum Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.6 (the edge sizes  represent  the  degree  of  the  correlation).  Based  on  the network structure, we evaluated the presence of cohesive clusters formed  by  correlated  subfamilies  using  a  network  community detection approach. In the Sbi network ( Figure 8A ), we identified four different modules with 87, 15, 3, and 9 elements.

FIGURE 8  | Coexpression networks for Sbi and Ssp kinase subfamilies. Each node corresponds to a different subfamily, its size corresponds to the average expression value for all kinases within the subfamily in different samples, and its color corresponds to the hub score and ranges from beige to dark green. Each edge corresponds to a correlation with a Pearson correlation coefficient of at least 0.6. The correlation strength is represented by the edge's width and the edge betweenness score is represented by the color (ranging from black to light blue, with light blue representing the highest values). (A) Sbi network with the background colored according to the community detection analysis. (B) Sbi network indicating the similarities with the Ssp network in red. (C) Ssp network with community structure information. (D) Ssp network indicating the similarities with the Sbi network in red.

<!-- image -->

Four modules were also identified in the Ssp network ( Figure  8C ),  but  the  distribution  of  the  elements  differed  (83, 13,  8,  and  2).  In  both  networks,  the  remaining  subfamilies (six  in  the  Sbi  network  and  13  in  the  Ssp  network)  were identified  as  disconnected  elements,  and  there  was  no  evident similarity  between  communities  ( Supplementary  Figure  7; Supplementary  Tables  40 and 41 ).

The  Sbi  and  Ssp  networks  exhibited  many  different  forms and  structures; however,  by  highlighting the  connections  in common  between  such  networks  ( Figures  8B,D ),  we  observed a similar substructure between representations. The main network components  were  connected  by  this  core  structure,  indicating the  strongest  correlations  between  kinase  subfamilies.  The  Ssp network  ( Figure  8D )  contained  an  edge  that  clearly  separates the  network  into  two  components;  interestingly,  this  edge  also belonged  to  the  common  structure.  By  coloring  the  network edges  according  to  the  betweenness  measure  ( Figures  8A,B ), we defined  the  connections  between  subfamilies  that  were  most likely to represent vulnerabilities in the networks, possibly indicating influential subfamilies in this complex system. The most important connections  were  related  to  the  subfamily  pairs  CAMK\_CDPK/ RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VI-2  and  CAMK\_CDPK/CMGC\_RCK  in  Sbi, and to RLK-Pelle\_L-LEC/RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VIII-1, RLK-Pelle\_

CR4L/RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VIII-1,  and  RLK-Pelle\_CR4L/RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-Xb-1  in  Ssp  ( Supplementary  Tables  42 and 43 ).

The most influential subfamilies in the networks were defined by  ranking  the  nodes  according  to  their  hub  scores,  which were used to color the nodes in the network, and highest hub scores denote kinase subfamilies with the most connections ( Supplementary  Figures  8, 9; Supplementary  Tables  40 and 41 ).  The  top  five  scores  belonged to the subfamilies RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-III, RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-XII-1,  CMGC\_CDK-CRK7-CDK9, CMGC\_GSK,  and  RLK-Pelle\_Extensin  in Ssp., and to the Unknown  category,  RLK-Pelle\_LRR-XV,  CMGC\_GSK,  STE\_ STE20-Fray, and CAMK\_OST1L  in  Sbi.  Additionally, high expression  values  in  subfamilies  did  not  indicate  increased  hub scores  ( Figure  8 ).

## DISCUSSION

Sugarcane possesses one of the most complex genomes known among  crops  (De  Souza  Barbosa  et  al.,  2020).  Only  in  2018, modern  technologies  enabled  the  assembly  of  a  chromosomeand  allele-level  genome  of  an  Ssp  clone  (Zhang  et  al.,  2018). This  study  paved  the  way  for  several  comprehensive  analyses

of gene families in the species (Hu et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a,b,c; Zhang et al., 2019b; Huang et al., 2020; Li et al.,  2020;  Su  et  al.,  2020a).  Here,  we  analyzed  the  kinome of not only sugarcane but also sorghum, a close diploid relative. Studies  estimate  that  the Saccharum and Sorghum lineages diverged 4.6-5.4 MYA (Kim et al., 2014). After diverging from Miscanthus 3.1-4.6  MYA  (Kim  et  al.,  2014),  the Saccharum lineage experienced at least  two  rounds  of  whole-genome duplication  (WGD;  Zhang  et  al.,  2018),  whereas  Sbi  remained diploid. Therefore, sorghum  genomic  resources have been extensively  employed  in  sugarcane  studies  (Okura  et  al.,  2016; Mancini  et  al.,  2018;  Bedre  et  al.,  2019).  As  the  genomes  of both  species  are  now  available,  comparisons  of  the  diversity, organization  and  expression  of  PKs  between  the  two  species enable us to perform in-depth explorations of the evolutionary history  of  these  proteins.

## Expansion and Diversification of Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes

Lehti-Shiu and Shiu (2012) indicated that substantial numerical variations  in  the  PK  superfamily  exist  among  plant  species; however, this variation could be overestimated due to differences in  the  completeness  of  the  genomic  assemblies.  Moreover, the  estimates  presented  by  this  and  other  studies  (Singh et  al.,  2014;  Wei  et  al.,  2014;  Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Zhu  et  al., 2018a,b)  indicated  a  number  of  PKs  in  Sbi  (1,210)  very similar to those of other Poaceae species, which range between 1,041  in  Bdi  and  1,417  in  Osa  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012; Wei et al., 2014). The Ssp genome, on the other hand, contains one  of  the  largest  numbers  of  PK  genes  reported  for  any plant  species  (2,919),  ranking  below  only  the  allohexaploid genome  of Triticum  aestivum (3,269  PKs;  Yan  et  al.,  2017). However, we must consider that this identification was performed using a genome with allele-level information; when only  Ssp  GMs  (i.e.,  single  representatives  of  all  copies  of  a gene)  were  analyzed,  we  found  a  much  lower  number  of PK  genes  (1,345),  which  is  also  within  the  range  of  PKs  in other Poaceae species. This discrepancy reinforces the hypothesis  of  Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu  (2012)  that  the  expansion of  PK  genes  is  directly  related  to  recent  WGD  events,  a suggestion  that  was  made  considering  that  paleopolyploid species,  such  as  soybean,  have  larger  repertoires  of  PKs. Indeed,  because  soybean's  duplication  events  occurred  much earlier than sugarcane's (having occurred ∼ 13-59  MYA; Schmutz  et  al.,  2010),  its  homologous  chromosomes  are  not treated  as  allelic  copies.  Therefore,  it  is  only  natural  that more PK genes were identified in the two kinomes compiled for  Sbi,  namely,  2,099  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012)  and  2,166 (Liu  et  al.,  2015)  PKs,  whereas  Ssp  which  underwent  very recent  WGDs,  contained  many  fewer  PK  genes  when  allelic copies  were  considered.

In Sbi, PK genes were more commonly located in subtelomeric regions. This pattern was even more evident when only tandemly duplicated PKs were considered; similar (though less pronounced) patterns were observed in the kinomes of soybean (Liu  et  al.,  2015), T.  aestivum (Yan  et  al.,  2017), Gossypium raimondii , and Gossypium barbadense (Yan et al., 2018).

Yan  et  al.  (2017)  noted  that  this  pattern  is  consistent  with the higher gene and expressed sequence tag densities in distal regions of chromosomes of T.  aestivum and inferred that such a location pattern could indicate chromosomal rearrangements. Our findings are equally compatible with the genomic landscape of  sorghum:  in  this  species,  the  density  of  genes  -  especially paralogs  -  is  markedly  higher  in  chromosome  extremities, whereas pericentromeric regions are very rich in long terminal repeat retrotransposons (Paterson et al., 2009; Mace and Jordan, 2011).  The  gene  density  in  Ssp  on  the  other  hand,  is  less skewed toward subtelomeric regions (Zhang et al., 2018), which might  explain  why  we  did  not  observe  such  a  clear  pattern for PK gene distribution in the species. An analogous observation was made by Zhang et al. (2019a) when comparing the genomic organization  of  Sbi, S.  officinarum ,  and S.  robustum .  These authors  note  that,  despite  observing  considerable  collinearity between species, genes that were widely dispersed in Saccharum linkage groups were much more tightly clustered in subtelomeric regions  on  Sbi  chromosomes.  The  same  pattern  is  evident  in the synteny plot between the Sbi and Ssp kinomes ( Figure 5D ): While  many  Sbi  PK  genes  are  present  in  Ssp  they  are  much more  widely distributed along chromosomes  in  Ssp. The dispersion  of  Ssp  kinase  genes  between  chromosomes  and allelic copies was also relatively balanced and  somewhat proportional  to  chromosomal  length.  Overall,  this  finding  is similar to the patterns of kinase genes  obtained  for rice (Dardick  et  al.,  2007),  pineapple,  and  grapevine  (Zhu  et  al., 2018a,b),  even  though  genes  are  more  unevenly  distributed along  chromosomes.

Differences in PK  composition may  lead to different functional profiles. Similarly, structural divergences may arise at  distinct  points  in  evolutionary  history  (Teich  et  al.,  2007; Liu et al., 2015), contributing to different domain organizations and,  subsequently,  to  diverse  functions  (Xu  et  al.,  2012). Although  PKs  in  the  same  subfamily  have  similar  intron distribution profiles in wheat  (Yan  et al., 2017), several compositional differences were detected in the soybean kinome (Liu  et  al.,  2015);  we  also  detected  such  differences  in  Ssp and Sbi. In the Sbi kinome, the distribution of introns across subfamilies was more organized than that in the Ssp kinome, i.e.,  the  distribution  of  introns  in  Ssp  was  more  variable among  the  PKs  subfamilies.  This  finding  indicates  the  more recent  intron/exon  reorganization  of  Ssp  PKs  and  that  gene reorganization might have occurred after these species diverged, a hypothesis that can be investigated for a deeper understanding of PKs  evolution  in  Saccharinae.  This  data  also benefits further  comparisons  among  subfamilies  and  gene  evolution within them. The NEK, CK1\_CK1-Pl,  PEK\_GCN2,  and TKL\_CTR1-DRK-2 families had the most prominent structural organization  in  both  Sbi  and  Ssp.  All  of  these  families  play essential  roles  in  cellular  processes  (Moniz  et  al.,  2011;  Tan and  Xue,  2014;  Takatani  et  al.,  2015;  Varberg  et  al.,  2018; Karpov et al., 2019; Pei et al., 2019), which requires a higher level  of  organization.  In  contrast  with  the  highly  organized gene  profile,  Ssp  PK  subfamilies  had  the  largest  number  of domains, corroborating the most recent possible gene organization  of  PKs.

The number of potential PK genes with a domain coverage less  than  50%  can  indicate  that  they  represent  atypical  kinases or  pseudogenes  (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012;  Liu  et  al.,  2015). For  Sbi,  this  criterion  resulted  in  the  exclusion  of ∼ 3%  of sequences  (57  genes)  with  significant  correspondences  with PKs.  In  Ssp  however,  almost  20%  of  the  initially  identified PKs  were  discarded  (735  genes).  Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu  (2012) found that  9.6%  of  all  kinases  initially  identified  in  25  species exhibited  a  domain  coverage  of  less  than  50%,  and  this  value varied  considerably  in  later  studies  that  employed  the  same methodology.  We  can  also  speculate  regarding  the  influence of polyploidization on  the pseudogenization  of PK  genes. Although no kinomes have been published for other autopolyploid species, similar findings were reported in allopolyploids.  The  kinome  of  the  allohexaploid T.  aestivum contains ∼ 22%  atypical  kinases,  whereas  the  kinomes  of  two of  its  diploid  parental  species, Triticum  urartu and Aegilops tauschii ,  contain ∼ 16  and ∼ 14%  atypical  kinases,  respectively. Similarly, the kinomes of G. raimondii and Gossypium arboretum contain ∼ 4  and ∼ 9%  atypical  kinases,  respectively,  whereas in  the  kinomes  of  the  allotetraploids Gossypium  hirsutum and G.  barbadense , ∼ 12%  of  PKs  have  such  characteristics.  The larger numbers  of  kinase  genes with atypical  domains  in polyploid  genomes  might  have  resulted  from  more  frequent pseudogenization events in these species and subsequent WGD, a  long-proposed  consequence  of  gene  duplication  and  thus  of polyploidization  (Magadum  et  al.,  2013).

Overall, the Ssp and Sbi kinomes exhibited similar duplication  patterns;  in  both  species,  the  most  common  type of  PK  duplication  was  segmental  duplications,  followed  by tandem  duplications.  These  duplication  events  are  usually reported  as  the  two  main  contributors  to  PK  expansion  in the genomes of several other species, especially in the RLK-Pelle superfamily  (Champion  et  al.,  2004;  Dardick  et  al.,  2007; Wei et al.,  2014;  Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Dezhsetan,  2017;  Zhu  et  al., 2018a,b).  Gene  retention  by  tandem  duplication  in  kinases has  already  been  identified,  with  very  high  rates  in  several plants (Lehti-Shiu and Shiu, 2012), and considerable correlation with different kinds of stress (Freeling, 2009). The association of  PK  expansion  through  such  events  with  defense  response and  signaling  pathways  has  been  widely  reported  in  kinome studies  (Zulawski  et  al.,  2014;  Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Yan  et  al., 2018;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b),  with  these  events  being  more pronounced  in  the  RLK-Pelle  group.  In  the  Ssp  and  Sbi kinomes,  we  found  several  subfamilies  in  this  group  with tandem  duplications  (mostly  in  LRR  families).  By  analyzing GO  biological process categories related to these events ( Figure  3 ),  we  found  a  considerable  frequency  of  categories related to the defense response; however, other general categories were  also  frequent,  which  is  explained  by  the  numerous processes related to these subfamilies. Interestingly, in RKF-3 (in the RLK-Pelle group) in Ssp all duplications were associated with tandem events, and members of this family have already been  linked  to  stress  responses  and  extracellular  signaling (Huang  et  al.,  2014;  Vaid  et  al.,  2016).  Even  with  this  high similarity,  several  differences  in  the  distribution  of  tandemly organized  genes  within  subfamilies  were  found  between  the

Ssp and Sbi kinomes. These species- and chromosomal regionspecific  organizational  characteristics  were  previously  noted by  Yan  et  al.  (2018)  in  a  comparison  of  cotton  kinomes. With respect to genome organization in Ssp and Sbi, different forms of tandem events have already been found (Wang et al., 2010),  with  specific  gene  organization  patterns  within  each genome  (Zhang  et  al.,  2018).

Segmental duplication events were also the major contributors to  PK  expansion  in  other  species;  in  the  soybean  kinome, these  events  accounted  for  the  origin  of  more  than  70%  of the  PKs  (Liu  et  al.,  2015);  in  grapevine,  they  were  estimated to  be  responsible  for  the  origin  of ∼ 30%  of  the  kinases  and were  thought  to  be  especially  relevant  in  the  expansion  of  the RLK-Pelle family (Zhu et al., 2018b). The most striking duplication-related difference between the Ssp and Sbi kinomes was  the  distribution  of  the  rate  of  nonsynonymous  mutations ( Ks ),  which  was  used  to  estimate  the  time  of  occurrence  of segmental  duplications.  While  the  range  of  Sbi  PK Ks values was comparatively wide, peaking at 0.65-0.85 ( Supplementary  Figure  6B ),  the Ks values  of  Ssp  exhibited  a very  prominent  peak  between  0  and  0.05  range;  additionally, the  further  distribution  of Ks was  somewhat  similar  to  that in  Sbi  ( Supplementary  Figure  6A ).  Based  on  the  clock-like rates  of  synonymous  substitutions,  we  estimated  that  the  time of  occurrence  of  this  large  number  of  segmental  duplications with Ks &lt;  0.05  was  less  than  3.8  MYA.  Thus,  we  postulate that  the Ks distribution  in  Ssp  is  a  consequence  of  the  recent polyploidization events in sugarcane; this hypothesis is supported by recent indications that the Saccharum -specific WGDs occurred in  the  last  3.1-4.6  million  years  (Kim  et  al.,  2014;  Zhang et al., 2018). This is further reinforced by the findings reported in Gossypium spp.  kinomes;  a  profile  of Ks distributions  very similar  to  that  in  Ssp  was  observed  in  the  allotetraploids G. hirsutum and G.  barbadense but  not  in  its  diploid  relatives (Yan  et  al.,  2018),  strengthening  the  connection  of  this  profile to  WGD  events.

## Sugarcane and Sorghum Kinomes' Expression Patterns

Several RNA-Seq experiments were used to estimate the expression  patterns  of  kinase  subfamilies  across  a  considerable range  of  tissues  and  genotypes.  Due  to  the  similar  expression patterns within subfamilies (Liu et al., 2015) and the possibility of  detecting  clearer  expression  patterns  in  different  subfamilies than at the individual gene level, expression analysis  was performed, combining expression levels of genes from subfamilies, instead  of  individual  genes.  The  differences  among  samples were more evident when separated by tissue instead of genotype and species ( Figure 7 ), possibly because of the strong conservation of  PKs  and  their  importance  in  several  fundamental  biological processes.  In  addition,  as  Liu  et  al.  (2015)  suggested,  we  also recognized that the Ssp and Sbi kinomes' expression is shaped by the physiological characteristics of these species. The highest expression levels were found for members of the CMGC group in  both  the  Sbi  and  Ssp  kinomes.  Additionally,  in  the  AGC, CAMK,  and  CK1  groups,  we  found  high  expression  levels  in several  subfamilies.  These  findings  were  previously  reported

in  other  plants,  suggesting  an  association  of  these  groups  with developmental processes (Liu et al.,  2015;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018a,b). Interestingly,  even  though  RLK-Pelle  subfamilies  account  for the  largest  number  of  PKs  among  the  kinomes,  they  were  not among  the  top  overexpressed  subfamilies.

Despite  having  only  one  kinase  member  in  Ssp  and  Sbi, the AGC\_PKA-PKG subfamily showed one of the highest average expression values across Ssp tissues. In addition to the unremarkable expression of RLK-Pelle members, the high AGC\_PKA-PKG  expression  corroborates  the  observation  that the  expression  in  the  Ssp  and  Sbi  kinomes  was  not  related  to the  number  of  family  members  across  families  and  groups.  If we  assume  that  PK  subfamilies  might  have  increased  in  size through  duplication  events,  this  might  be  a  case  of  dosage balance,  a  phenomenon  in  which  the  function  of  regulatory genes  is  sensitive  to  a  stoichiometric  equilibrium  (Birchler  and Veitia,  2014).  Thus,  PK  families  composed  of  more  members (which  survived  duplications  and  thus  present  more  copies) have  a  tendency  toward  lower  average  expression,  as  has  been demonstrated in other plants (Birchler and Veitia, 2012). Additionally,  AGC\_PKA-PKG  subfamily  has  been  reported  as broadly  important  in  both  Ssp  and  Sbi.  In  Ssp  studies  have demonstrated  the  association  of  its  members  with  signaling pathways  (Kasirajan  et  al.,  2020),  cell  proliferation  (Li  et  al., 2016b), infection responses (Santa Brigida et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018),  hormone signal transduction in response to drought (Li et  al.,  2016a),  and  pathways  related  to  sucrose  storage  and photosynthesis (Hoang et al., 2017; Thirugnanasambandam et al., 2017).  In  Sbi,  the  importance  of  this  family  is  also  linked  with stress and signal responses (Li et al., 2018; Parra-Londono et al., 2018;  Nagaraju  et  al.,  2020;  Vikal  et  al.,  2020).  Therefore,  these insights  into  expression  patterns  constitute  a  valuable  reservoir of information for analyzing the importance of Ssp and Sbi kinases.

The final analysis performed using RNA-Seq aimed to establish closer  relationships  among  kinase  subfamilies  in  Sbi  and  Ssp through  coexpression  networks,  enabling  biological  inferences using  connection  patterns.  The  gene  coexpression  networks were  constructed  with  pairwise  correlations  (similarity  scores) from the gene expression quantification data (Serin et al., 2016). Pearson  correlation  coefficients  were  used  because  of  their reasonable  performance  in  RNA-Seq  datasets  (Ballouz  et  al., 2015). Moreover, as Liu et al. (2015) suggested, we constructed the networks based on subfamily relationships instead of single genes  because  of  the  enhanced  functional  interpretability  and general inferences allowed by this approach. Complex networks have been widely applied to visualize complex biological systems (Barabási,  2016),  and  constitute  a  powerful  tool  for  modeling gene  interactions  (Zhao  et  al.,  2010).  For  kinase  subfamily representations, these networks can facilitate the interpretation of  relevant  relationships  among  sets  of  kinases  and  provide insights  into  the  interactions  among  metabolic  mechanisms. Such applications are possible because similar expression patterns on  genes  belonging  to  the  same  pathways  reflect  the  network structure  (Lee  et  al.,  2015),  thus  providing  a  tool  to  model these complex molecular interactions (Ficklin and Feltus, 2011).

Together with the network representations, we used community  detection  methodologies  to  identify  modules  of cohesive elements, which possibly indicate more strongly interconnected metabolic relationships (Mitra et al., 2013; Mall et al., 2017; Zhang and Yin, 2020). This structural organization constitutes  a  reservoir  of  genetic  information  among  kinomes and provides important insights into how  PK  subfamilies biologically interact. When some subfamilies without a significant amount  of  relationships  with  other  elements  were  excluded [nine Sbi subfamilies in communities 3, 4, and 6-10 ( Supplementary Table 40 ) and 13 Ssp subfamilies in communities 3-9, 11-13, and 15-17 ( Supplementary Table 41 )], the network structures  ( Figure 8 )  indicated  that  all  of  the  subfamilies  were interconnected, considering the nonrandom dependencies across subfamilies  captured  by  the  established  correlation  coefficient threshold  (Ficklin  and  Feltus,  2011).  Even  though  they  have specific  functions,  all  kinase  subfamilies  play  roles  in  several common metabolic  processes,  and  this  commonality  is  clearly reflected  in  the  network  structures.

In addition, considering the roles of  PKs  in  metabolic signaling and  stress responses, the organization of several subfamilies is reasonably conserved among different plant species (Lehti-Shiu  and  Shiu,  2012).  By  comparing  the  Sbi  and  Ssp networks, we identified a substantial core of similarity between the subfamily interactions in these species, which might indicate several  analogous  expression  profiles  ( Figure  7 ).  In  addition to  the  comparison  of  network  connectivities,  other  topological characteristics  were  used  to  identify  important  features  in  the organization  of  kinome  subfamilies.  Hub  and  betweenness measures  were  calculated  to  supply  evidence  regarding  how specific  subfamilies  are  important  in  most  metabolic  processes involving  kinases.

Within a network structure, elements with the most connections are called hubs (Barabási, 2016). These nodes have been  used  to  identify  functionally  critical  components  and  as an additional approach to describe the network structure (Hong et al.,  2013;  Azuaje,  2014;  van  Dam  et  al.,  2018).  In  the constructed networks, the hub nodes indicate kinase subfamilies with the most correlations, which might represent sets of kinases with influential roles in diverse  metabolic  mechanisms  in kinomes. Interestingly, the Sbi and Ssp networks did not exhibit high overlap of hub nodes. This observation provides evidence that  although  there  are  several  similarities  among  the  kinase expression  profiles  in  the  species,  and  the  same  biological cascades are activated, as indicated by the GO  analyses ( Supplementary  Figure  5 ), the mechanism  by  which the expression balance is achieved is species-specific. In fact, previous studies  in  polyploids  have  shown  that  this  balancing  varies even  among  lines  of  the  same  species  (Mutti  et  al.,  2017).

In  both  Sbi  and  Ssp  networks  and  those  constructed  in other  kinome  studies  (Liu  et  al.,  2015;  Zhu  et  al.,  2018b), different  members  of  RLK-Pelle  (mostly  those  in  the  LRR  and RLCK families) were identified as hubs. Considering the described abundance  of  these  families,  their  tandem  duplications,  and related  functional  implications,  the  strong  influence  of  such nodes on the correlations among kinase subfamilies was expected. CMGC group subfamilies were also identified as hub elements, as  observed  in  the  soybean  kinome  (Liu  et  al.,  2015).  In  the sugarcane network, the GSK and CDK families had a considerable

number of connections, which is clearly explained by the very high number of pathways in which their members are involved, as previously noted. Additionally, CDK has already been found to  be  related  to  stress  signaling  in  Ssp  (Patade  et  al.,  2011) and  Sbi  (Challa  and  Neelapu,  2018).  In  Sbi,  DYRK  also  had a  high  node  degree.  Interestingly,  members  of  this  family  have already been found to be related to the suppression of photosynthesis activity  (Kimura and Ishikawa, 2018); thus, the importance and impact of this family among kinases is evident. Among  the  other  hubs,  the  STE  group  (STE20  family)  was also important in the Ssp and Sbi networks, which can be explained by the high number of biological cascades related to  this  subfamily  (Xiong  et  al.,  2016).

Several  factors  can  explain  why  a  subfamily  constitutes  a hub  in  our  constructed  networks,  such  as  a  high  expression level  (CMGC\_GSK,  CAMK\_OST1L,  CK1\_CK1,  and  CMGC\_ DYRK-YAK), a large number of subfamily members (RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-III), the occurrence of tandem duplications (IRE1), a more structured gene organization considering intron-exon structures (RLK-Pelle\_RLCK-XII-1,  RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VI-1,  and  CMGC\_ GSK), and the presence of diverse functional domains (RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-III, CMGC\_CDK-CRK7-CDK9, and RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VII-1) or multikinase domains (AGC\_RSK-2, RLK-Pelle\_LRR-III, and CMGC\_CDK-CRK7-CDK9).  However,  we  did  not  observe  a consistent feature profile required for a subfamily to be considered a  hub.  Evidence  supports  the  hubs'  importance;  however,  the real  reasons  for  their  key  importance  within  these  structures are  likely  to  be  linked  with  functional  properties,  as  widely discussed  in  other  coexpression  studies  (Goel  et  al.,  2018;  Tai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020).

In addition to hub descriptions, edge betweenness measures also  have  high  interpretability  considering  the  complex  system modeled  by  the  networks.  These  calculations  are  based  on properties from the entire network (Dunn et al., 2005), exploiting the network flow and identifying possible essential interactions for  the  visual  configuration  (van  Dam  et  al.,  2018).  In  both the  Sbi  and  Ssp  networks,  a  clearly  separated  group  of  PKs that  was  connected  with  the  other  elements  by  only  one  or a  few  connections  was  observed.  This  network  configuration might indicate important relationships among kinase subfamilies, providing  evidence  indicating  how  these  specific  subfamilies can interconnect. In Ssp the most critical connections identified by betweenness calculations were found in the RLK-Pelle\_L-LEC/ RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VIII-1 and RLK-Pelle\_CR4L/RLK-Pelle\_ LRR-Xb-1  subfamilies.  These  nodes  are  members  of  families with  undeniable  importance,  as  seen  in  the  network  structure. The bridges in these kinase-kinase interactions can be explained by  the  large  number  of  members  that  can  act  in  a  connected manner,  which  is  less  evident  in  other  subfamilies.  However, as  observed  in  the  hub  configurations,  these  structures  are more evidently linked with functional roles, such as interconnected  signaling  pathways.

In the Sbi network, on the other hand, the highest betweenness values  were  found  in  the  CAMK\_CDPK/RLK-Pelle\_LRR-VI-2 and CAMK\_CDPK/CMGC\_RCK subfamilies. Interestingly, CAMK\_CDPK  genes have been extensively indicated to be  located  at  important  genomic  regions  regulating  growth, development,  and  resistance  mechanisms  to  several  types  of abiotic and biotic stresses in both Sbi (Pestenácz and Erdei, 1996; Nhiri  et  al.,  1998;  Jain  et  al.,  2008;  Li  et  al.,  2010;  Monreal et  al.,  2013;  Usha  Kiranmayee  et  al.,  2017)  and  Ssp  (Li  et  al., 2016b;  Marquardt  et  al.,  2017;  Ling  et  al.,  2018;  Dharshini et  al.,  2020;  Srivastava  and  Kumar,  2020;  Su  et  al.,  2020b), further  supporting  the  association  of  functional  characteristics in  the  network  structure.

## CONCLUSION

This  study  provided  an  extensive  reservoir  of  genetic  and molecular  information  for  both  Sbi  and  Ssp.  Considering  the incontestable importance of kinases in several essential biological processes,  the  identification,  categorization,  and  analysis  of the kinomes of these species resulted in an important compendium  of  knowledge  for  use  in  further  studies.  Clear similarities were found in protein properties, domain compositions,  genomic  organization,  expression  profiles,  and subfamily interactions. However, we also observed pronounced differences  in  duplication  events,  which  probably  arose  from Ssp  recent  WGDs,  facilitating  understanding  of  how  the  Sbi and  Ssp  kinomes  have  evolved  considering  this  vast  protein superfamily.  Through  coexpression  networks  we  could  supply insights  into  kinase  subfamilies'  interactions  in  Sbi  and  Spp; we could define a common interactional structure, but observed substantial  differences  on  the  subfamilies'  communications, quantified  with  community  structures,  hub,  and  betweenness scores. Further assessments of elements with relevant influence over the network architecture could highlight subfamilies with direct influence over the cascade of kinase cellular mechanisms. More  detailed  studies  on  these  groups  should  contribute  to the  understanding of molecular signaling and stress responses in  Sbi  and  Ssp.

## DATA  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT

The  datasets  presented  in  this  study  can  be  found  in  online repositories. The names of the repositories and accession numbers can be found at: National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, PRJEB38368,  PRJNA681593,  PRJEB41560  and  PRJEB40481.

## AUTHOR  CONTRIBUTIONS

AA and RP performed all  analyses  and  wrote  the  manuscript. AG, FC, and GH assisted in processing the sugarcane RNA-Seq data,  and  together  with  CC-S,  MM,  and  DS,  were  responsible for  the  sugarcane  RNA-Seq  experiments.  MMC  assisted  in  the functional  analyses  of  the  kinase  subfamilies.  LS  contributed to  the  identification  of  the  kinases.  JN  assisted  in  the  kinase categorization.  LP ,  ML,  MSC,  and  TB  were  responsible  for  the sugarcane field experiments. MQ assisted in the network analysis. WP assisted in the pipeline definition and kinase categorization.

GM and AS conceived  the  project.  All  authors  contributed  to the  article  and  approved  the  submitted  version.

## FUNDING

This  work  was  supported  by  grants  from  the  Fundação  de Amparo à Pesquisa de do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP 2020/07434-0, 2015/22993-7, 2008/52197-4, and 2005/55258-6), the Conselho  Nacional  de  Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq 313,426/2018-0 and 434,886/20181),  and  the  Coordenação  de  Aperfeiçoamento  de  Pessoal  de Nível  Superior  (CAPES  -  Computational  Biology  Programme and  Financial  Code  001).  AA  received  a  PhD  fellowship  from FAPESP  (2019/03232-6).  RP  received  an  MSc  fellowship  from CAPES (88887.177386/2018-00) and MSc and PhD fellowships from  FAPESP  (2018/18588-8  and  2019/21682-9).  GH  received a  PhD  fellowship  from  CAPES  (88882.160212/2017-01).  CC-S received  a  PD  fellowship  from  FAPESP  (2015/16399-5).  MM received a PD fellowship from FAPESP (2014/11482-9). DS  received  a  PhD  fellowship  from  FAPESP  (2010/50119-6).

## REFERENCES

- Ahuja,  I.,  de  Vos,  R.  C.  H.,  Bones,  A.  M.,  and  Hall,  R.  D.  (2010).  Plant molecular stress responses face climate change. Trends Plant Sci. 15, 664-674. doi:  10.1016/j.tplants.2010.08.002
- Andrews,  S.  (2010).  FastQC:  a  quality  control  tool  for  high  throughput sequence data. Available at: http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/ projects/fastqc  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Ashburner,  M.,  Ball,  C.  A.,  Blake,  J.  A.,  Botstein,  D.,  Butler,  H.,  Cherry,  J.  M., et  al.  (2000).  Gene  ontology:  tool  for  the  unification  of  biology. Nat.  Genet. 25,  25-29.  doi:  10.1038/75556
- Azuaje,  F.  J.  (2014).  Selecting  biologically  informative  genes  in  co-expression networks with a centrality score. Biol. Direct 9:12. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-9-12
- Bairoch,  A.,  and  Apweiler,  R.  (2000).  The  SWISS-PROT  protein  sequence database  and  its  supplement  TrEMBL  in  2000. Nucleic Acids  Res. 28,  45-48. doi:  10.1093/nar/28.1.45
- Ballouz,  S.,  Verleyen,  W .,  and  Gillis,  J.  (2015).  Guidance  for  RNA-seq  coexpression network construction and analysis: safety in numbers. Bioinformatics 31,  2123-2130.  doi:  10.1093/bioinformatics/btv118
- Barabási, A. (2016). Network science . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Bedre, R., Irigoyen, S., Schaker, P . D. C., Monteiro-Vitorello, C. B., Da Silva, J. A., and  Mandadi,  K.  K.  (2019).  Genome-wide  alternative  splicing  landscapes modulated  by  biotrophic  sugarcane  smut  pathogen. Sci.  Rep. 9:8876.  doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-45184-1
- Birchler,  J.  A.,  and  Veitia,  R.  A.  (2012).  Gene  balance  hypothesis:  connecting issues  of  dosage  sensitivity  across  biological  disciplines. Proc.  Natl.  Acad. Sci.  U.  S.  A. 109,  14746-14753.  doi:  10.1073/pnas.1207726109
- Birchler,  J.  A.,  and  Veitia,  R.  A.  (2014).  The  gene  balance  hypothesis:  dosage effects in plants. Methods Mol. Biol. 1112, 25-32. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-773-0\_2
- Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M., and Usadel, B. (2014). Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for  Illumina  sequence  data. Bioinformatics 30,  2114-2120.  doi:  10.1093/ bioinformatics/btu170
- Brandes,  U.  (2001).  A  faster  algorithm  for  betweenness  centrality. J.  Math. Sociol. 25,  163-177.  doi:  10.1080/0022250X.2001.9990249
- Carraro,  D.  M.,  Lambais,  M.  R.,  and  Carrer,  H.  (2001).  In  silico  characterization and expression analyses of sugarcane putative sucrose non-fermenting-1 (SNF1) related kinases. Genet. Mol. Biol. 24, 35-41. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572001000100006
- Challa, S., and Neelapu, N. R. (2018). 'Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for abiotic stress tolerance in plants' in Biochemical, physiological and molecular avenues  for  combating  abiotic  stress  tolerance  in  plants .  ed.  S.  H.  Wani (Amsterdam,  Netherlands:  Elsevier),  135-150.

LS received an undergraduate fellowship from FAPESP (2019/19340-2).  TB  received  a  PhD  fellowship  from  FAPESP (2010/50091-4).  AS  received  a  research  fellowship  from  CNPq.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  Fundação  de  Amparo  à Pesquisa  de  do  Estado  de  São  Paulo  (FAPESP),  the  Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), and the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior  (CAPES).

## SUPPLEMENTARY  MATERIAL

The  Supplementary  Figures  and  Tables  for  this  article  have been  deposited  in  Figshare  (https://figshare.com/):  https://doi. org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5122460.v2. The Supplementary Results section  can  be  found  online  at:  https://www.frontiersin.org/ articles/10.3389/fpls.2021.668623/full#supplementary-material

- Champion,  A.,  Kreis,  M.,  Mockaitis,  K.,  Picaud,  A.,  and  Henry,  Y.  (2004). Arabidopsis kinome:  after  the  casting. Funct.  Integr.  Genom. 4,  163-187.  doi: 10.1007/s10142-003-0096-4
- Clayton,  W .  D.  (1987).  ' Andropogoneae'  in Grass  systematics  and  evolution .  ed. T. R. Soderstrom (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institutional Press), 307-309. Conesa,  A.,  Götz,  S.,  García-Gómez,  J.  M.,  Terol,  J.,  Talón,  M.,  and  Robles,  M. (2005).  Blast2GO:  a  universal  tool  for  annotation,  visualization  and  analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21,  3674-3676. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/bti610
- Correr,  F.  H.,  Hosaka,  G.  K.,  Barreto,  F.  Z.,  Valadão,  I.  B.,  Balsalobre,  T.  W .  A., Furtado,  A.,  et  al.  (2020).  Differential  expression  in  leaves  of Saccharum genotypes  contrasting  in  biomass  production  provides  evidence  of  genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC  Genomics 21:673. doi: 10.1186/ s12864-020-07091-y
- Csardi,  G.,  and  Nepusz,  T.  (2006).  The  igraph  software  package  for  complex network  research. InterJ.  Complex  Syst. 1695,  1-9.
- Dai,  A.  (2013).  Increasing  drought  under  global  warming  in  observations  and models. Nat.  Clim.  Chang. 3,  52-58.  doi:  10.1038/nclimate1633
- Dardick,  C.,  Chen,  J.,  Richter,  T.,  Ouyang,  S.,  and  Ronald,  P .  (2007).  The  rice kinase database. A phylogenomic database for the rice kinome. Plant Physiol. 143,  579-586.  doi:  10.1104/pp.106.087270
- De  Souza  Barbosa,  G.  V .,  Dos  Santos,  J.  M.,  Diniz,  C.  A.,  Cursi,  D.  E.,  and Hoffmann,  H.  P.  (2020).  'Energy  cane  breeding'  in Sugarcane  biorefinery, technology  and  perspectives .  eds.  F.  Santos,  S.  Rabelo,  M.  De  Matos  and P.  Eichler  (London,  UK:  Elsevier),  103-116.
- Dezhsetan,  S.  (2017).  Genome  scanning  for  identification  and  mapping  of receptor-like  kinase  (RLK)  gene  superfamily  in Solanum tuberosum . Physiol. Mol.  Biol.  Plants 23,  755-765.  doi:  10.1007/s12298-017-0471-6
- Dharshini, S., Hoang, N. V ., Mahadevaiah, C., Padmanabhan, T. S., Alagarasan, G., Suresha, G., et al. (2020). Root transcriptome analysis of Saccharum spontaneum uncovers  key  genes  and  pathways  in  response  to  low-temperature  stress. Environ.  Exp.  Bot. 171:103935.  doi:  10.1016/j.envexpbot.2019.103935
- D'Hont, A., Ison, D., Alix, K., Roux, C., and Glaszmann, J. C. (1998). Determination of basic chromosome numbers in the genus Saccharum by  physical mapping of  ribosomal  RNA  genes. Genome 41,  221-225.  doi:  10.1139/g98-023
- Ding,  Z., Fu, L., Tan, D., Sun, X., and  Zhang,  J. (2020). An  integrative transcriptomic  and  genomic  analysis  reveals  novel  insights  into  the  hub genes and  regulatory networks  associated with rubber synthesis in H. brasiliensis . Ind.  Crop.  Prod. 153:112562.  doi:  10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112562
- Dugas,  D.  V .,  Monaco,  M.  K.,  Olson,  A.,  Klein,  R.  R.,  Kumari,  S.,  Ware,  D., et  al.  (2011).  Functional  annotation  of  the  transcriptome  of Sorghum bicolor

- in  response  to  osmotic  stress  and  abscisic  acid. BMC Genomics 12:514.  doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-514
- Dunn,  R.,  Dudbridge,  F.,  and  Sanderson,  C.  M.  (2005).  The  use  of  edgebetweenness clustering to investigate biological function in protein interaction networks. BMC  Bioinformatics 6:39.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2105-6-39
- Eddy,  S.  R.  (1998).  Profile  hidden  Markov  models. Bioinformatics 14,  755-763. doi:  10.1093/bioinformatics/14.9.755
- Edgar, R. C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and  high  throughput. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 32,  1792-1797.  doi:  10.1093/nar/ gkh340
- El-Gebali,  S.,  Mistry,  J.,  Bateman,  A.,  Eddy,  S.  R.,  Luciani,  A.,  Potter,  S.  C., et  al.  (2019).  The  Pfam  protein  families  database  in  2019. Nucleic  Acids Res. 47,  D427-D432.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gky995
- Falco, M.  C., Marbach,  P. A. S., Pompermayer,  P.,  Lopes, F. C. C.,  and Silva-Filho,  M.  C.  (2001).  Mechanisms  of  sugarcane  response  to  herbivory. Genet.  Mol.  Biol. 24,  113-122.  doi:  10.1590/S1415-47572001000100016
- FAO (2020). FAOSTAT: production sheet. Available at: http://www.fao.org/faostat/ en/#data  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Ficklin,  S.  P .,  and  Feltus,  F .  A.  (2011).  Gene  coexpression  network  alignment and  conservation  of  gene  modules  between  two  grass  species:  maize  and rice. Plant  Physiol. 156,  1244-1256.  doi:  10.1104/pp.111.173047
- Finn, R. D., Clements, J., and Eddy, S. R. (2011). HMMER web server: interactive sequence similarity searching. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, W29-W37. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkr367
- Freeling,  M.  (2009).  Bias  in  plant  gene  content  following  different  sorts  of duplication:  tandem,  whole-genome,  segmental,  or  by  transposition. Annu. Rev.  Plant  Biol. 60,  433-453.  doi:  10.1146/annurev.arplant.043008.092122
- Freeling, M., Scanlon, M.  J., and  Fowler, J. E. (2015). Fractionation  and subfunctionalization  following  genome  duplications:  mechanisms  that  drive gene  content  and  their  consequences. Curr.  Opin.  Genet.  Dev. 35,  110-118. doi:  10.1016/j.gde.2015.11.002
- Gaut, B. S., Morton, B. R., McCaig, B. C., and Clegg, M. T. (1996). Substitution rate  comparisons  between  grasses  and  palms:  synonymous  rate  differences at  the  nuclear  gene  Adh  parallel  rate  differences  at  the  plastid  gene  rbc  L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 10274-10279. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.19.10274
- Goel,  P .,  Sharma,  N.  K.,  Bhuria,  M.,  Sharma,  V .,  Chauhan,  R.,  Pathania,  S., et  al.  (2018).  Transcriptome  and  co-expression  network  analyses  identify key  genes  regulating  nitrogen  use  efficiency  in Brassica  juncea L. Sci.  Rep. 8,  1-18.  doi:  10.1038/s41598-018-25826-6
- Goodstein,  D.  M.,  Shu,  S.,  Howson,  R.,  Neupane,  R.,  Hayes,  R.  D.,  Fazo,  J., et  al.  (2012).  Phytozome:  a  comparative  platform  for  green  plant  genomics. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40,  D1178-D1186.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr944
- Gregory, P. J., Johnson, S. N., Newton, A. C., and Ingram, J. S. (2009). Integrating pests  and  pathogens  into  the  climate  change/food  security  debate. J.  Exp. Bot. 60,  2827-2838.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erp080
- Grivet,  L.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2002).  Sugarcane  genomics:  depicting  the  complex genome  of  an  important  tropical  crop. Curr.  Opin.  Plant  Biol. 5,  122-127. doi:  10.1016/S1369-5266(02)00234-0
- Guo,  H.,  Jiao,  Y.,  Tan,  X.,  Wang,  X.,  Huang,  X.,  Jin,  H.,  et  al.  (2019).  Gene duplication  and  genetic  innovation  in  cereal  genomes. Genome  Res. 29, 261-269.  doi:  10.1101/gr.237511.118
- Hanada,  K.,  Zou,  C.,  Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  Shinozaki,  K.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2008). Importance  of  lineage-specific  expansion  of  plant  tandem  duplicates  in  the adaptive  response  to  environmental  stimuli. Plant  Physiol. 148,  993-1003. doi:  10.1104/pp.108.122457
- Hanks, S. K., and Hunter, T. (1995). The eukaryotic protein kinase superfamily: kinase (catalytic) domain structure and classification 1. FASEB J. 9,  576-596. doi:  10.1096/fasebj.9.8.7768349
- Hasanuzzaman, M. (2020). Agronomic crops: Stress responses and tolerance .  New York,  NY:  Springer.
- Hoang,  N.  V.,  Furtado,  A.,  O'Keeffe,  A.  J.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and  Henry,  R.  J. (2017). Association of gene expression with biomass content and composition in  sugarcane. PLoS  One 12:e0183417.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0183417
- Hong, S., Chen, X., Jin, L., and Xiong, M. (2013). Canonical correlation analysis for RNA-seq co-expression networks. Nucleic Acids Res. 41:e95. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkt145
- Horton,  P .,  Park,  K.  J.,  Obayashi,  T.,  Fujita,  N.,  Harada,  H.,  Adams-Collier,  C., et  al.  (2007).  WoLF  PSORT:  protein  localization  predictor. Nucleic  Acids Res. 35,  W585-W587.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm259
- Hu,  W.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Shen,  Q.,  Zhang,  X.,  et  al.  (2018).  New insights  into  the  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  the  SWEET  family in Saccharum based  on  comparative  genomics. BMC Plant Biol. 18:270.  doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1495-y
- Huang,  T.  L.,  Huang,  L.  Y.,  Fu,  S.  F.,  Trinh,  N.  N.,  and  Huang,  H.  J.  (2014). Genomic profiling  of  rice  roots  with  short-and  long-term  chromium  stress. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 86,  157-170.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-014-0219-4
- Huang,  X.,  Song,  X.,  Chen,  R.,  Zhang,  B.,  Li,  C.,  Liang,  Y.,  et  al.  (2020). Genome-wide  analysis  of  the  DREB  subfamily  in Saccharum  spontaneum reveals  their  functional  divergence  during  cold  and  drought  stresses. Front. Genet. 10:1326.  doi:  10.3389/fgene.2019.01326
- Hunter,  T.  (1995).  Protein  kinases  and  phosphatases:  the  Yin  and  Yang  of protein phosphorylation  and  signaling. Cell 80, 225-236.  doi: 10.1016/ 0092-8674(95)90405-0
- ISO (2020). International sugar organization. Available at: https://www.isosugar. org/sugarsector/sugar  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Jain,  M.,  Li,  Q.  B.,  and  Chourey,  P .  S.  (2008).  Cloning  and  expression  analyses of sucrose non-fermenting-1-related kinase 1 (SnRK1b) gene during development  of  sorghum  and  maize  endosperm  and  its  implicated  role  in sugar-to-starch metabolic transition. Physiol. Plant. 134, 161-173. doi: 10.1111/j. 1399-3054.2008.01106.x
- Karpov, P. A., Sheremet, Y. A., Blume, Y. B., and Yemets, A. I. (2019). Studying the  role  of  protein  kinases  CK1  in  organization  of  cortical  microtubules  in Arabidopsis  thaliana root  cells. Cytol.  Genet. 53,  441-450.  doi:  10.3103/ S0095452719060033
- Kasirajan,  L.,  Valiyaparambth,  R.,  Velu,  J.,  Hari,  H.,  Srinivasavedantham,  V ., and Athaiappan, S. (2020). Gene expression studies of Saccharum spontaneum , a  wild  relative  of  sugarcane  in  response  to  salinity  stress. Biotechnol.  Appl. Biochem. doi:  10.1002/bab.1923  [Epub  ahead  of  print]
- Kebrom,  T.  H.,  McKinley,  B.,  and  Mullet,  J.  E.  (2017).  Dynamics  of  gene expression during development and expansion of vegetative stem internodes of bioenergy sorghum. Biotechnol. Biofuels 10, 1-16. doi: 10.1186/ s13068-017-0848-3
- Kim,  C.,  Wang,  X.,  Lee,  T.  H.,  Jakob,  K.,  Lee,  G.  J.,  and  Paterson,  A.  H. (2014).  Comparative analysis  of Miscanthus and Saccharum reveals  a  shared whole-genome  duplication  but  different  evolutionary  fates. Plant  Cell 26, 2420-2429.  doi:  10.1105/tpc.114.125583
- Kimura, M., and Ishikawa, T. (2018). Suppression of DYRK ortholog expression affects wax ester fermentation in Euglena gracilis . J. Appl. Phycol. 30, 367-373. doi:  10.1007/s10811-017-1235-y
- Kleinberg,  J.  M.  (1999).  Authoritative  sources  in  a  hyperlinked  environment. J.  ACM 46,  604-632.  doi:  10.1145/324133.324140
- Kolde,  R.,  and  Kolde,  M.  R.  (2015).  Package  'pheatmap' .  R  Package  1,  790. Krogh, A., Larsson, B., Von Heijne, G., and Sonnhammer, E. L. (2001). Predicting transmembrane  protein  topology  with  a  hidden  Markov  model:  application to complete genomes. J.  Mol. Biol. 305, 567-580. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315 Krzywinski,  M.,  Schein,  J.,  Birol,  I.,  Connors,  J.,  Gascoyne,  R.,  Horsman,  D., et  al.  (2009).  Circos:  an  information  aesthetic  for  comparative  genomics. Genome  Res. 19,  1639-1645.  doi:  10.1101/gr.092759.109
- Lalman,  J.  A.,  Shewa,  W .  A.,  Gallagher,  J.,  and  Ravella,  S.  (2016).  'Biofuels production  from  renewable  feedstocks'  in Quality  living  through  chemurgy and  green  chemistry .  ed.  P .  C.  K.  Lau  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  193-220. Lee,  T.,  Kim,  H.,  and  Lee,  I.  (2015).  Network-assisted  crop  systems  genetics: network inference and integrative analysis. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 24,  61-70. doi:  10.1016/j.pbi.2015.02.001
- Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2012).  Diversity,  classification  and  function of  the  plant  protein  kinase  superfamily. Philos.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  B:  Biol.  Sci. 367,  2619-2639.  doi:  10.1098/rstb.2012.0003
- Leinonen, R., Sugawara, H., Shumway, M., and International Nucleotide Sequence Database  Collaboration  (2010).  The  sequence  read  archive. Nucleic  Acids Res. 39,  D19-D21.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkq1019
- Li, Z., Hua, X., Zhong, W ., Yuan, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., et al. (2020). Genomewide  identification  and  expression  profile  analysis  of  WRKY  family  genes in the autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum . Plant Cell Physiol. 61,  616-630. doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcz227
- Li,  M.,  Liang,  Z.,  Zeng,  Y .,  Jing,  Y .,  Wu,  K.,  Liang,  J.,  et  al.  (2016b).  De  novo analysis  of  transcriptome  reveals  genes  associated  with  leaf  abscission  in sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). BMC Genomics 17:195.  doi:  10.1186/ s12864-016-2552-2

- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  Liang,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Liu,  X.,  et  al.  (2016a). Differential  expression  profiles  and  pathways  of  genes  in  sugarcane  leaf  at elongation stage in response to drought stress. Sci. Rep. 6:25698. doi: 10.1038/ srep25698
- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Wang,  Z.,  Liang,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  et  al.  (2017). Molecular  characterization  and  co-expression  analysis  of  the  SnRK2  gene family  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-12.  doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16152-4
- Li,  J.,  Tang,  W .,  Zhang,  Y .  W .,  Chen,  K.  N.,  Wang,  C.,  Liu,  Y .,  et  al.  (2018). Genome-wide  association  studies  for  five  forage  quality-related  traits  in sorghum ( Sorghum bicolor L.). Front. Plant Sci. 9:1146. doi: 10.3389/ fpls.2018.01146
- Li,  L.  B.,  Zhang,  Y .  R.,  Liu,  K.  C.,  Ni,  Z.  F .,  Fang,  Z.  J.,  Sun,  Q.  X.,  et  al. (2010).  Identification  and  bioinformatics  analysis  of  SnRK2  and  CIPK  family genes in sorghum. Agric. Sci. China 9, 19-30. doi: 10.1016/S1671-2927(09)60063-8
- Ling,  H.,  Huang,  N.,  Wu,  Q.,  Su,  Y.,  Peng,  Q.,  Ahmed,  W .,  et  al.  (2018). Transcriptional insights into the sugarcane-sorghum mosaic virus interaction. Trop.  Plant  Biol. 11,  163-176.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-018-9210-6
- Liu,  J.,  Chen,  N.,  Grant,  J.  N.,  Cheng,  Z.  M.,    Stewart,  C.  N.  Jr.,  and  Hewezi,  T. (2015). Soybean kinome: functional classification and gene expression patterns. J.  Exp.  Bot. 66,  1919-1934.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/eru537
- Mace,  E.  S.,  and  Jordan,  D.  R.  (2011).  Integrating  sorghum  whole  genome sequence  information  with  a  compendium  of  sorghum  QTL  studies  reveals uneven  distribution of QTL  and  of gene-rich regions with significant implications for crop improvement. Theor. Appl. Genet. 123:169. doi: 10.1007/ s00122-011-1575-y
- Magadum,  S.,  Banerjee,  U.,  Murugan,  P .,  Gangapur,  D.,  and  Ravikesavan,  R. (2013). Gene duplication as a major force in evolution. J. Genet. 92, 155-161. doi:  10.1007/s12041-013-0212-8
- Makita,  Y.,  Shimada,  S.,  Kawashima,  M.,  Kondou-Kuriyama,  T.,  Toyoda,  T., and  Matsui,  M.  (2015).  MOROKOSHI:  transcriptome  database  in Sorghum bicolor . Plant  Cell  Physiol. 56:e6.  doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcu187
- Mall,  R.,  Ullah,  E.,  Kunji,  K.,  D' Angelo,  F.,  Bensmail,  H.,  and  Ceccarelli,  M. (2017).  'Differential  community  detection  in  paired  biological  networks, ' in Proceedings  of  the  8th  ACM  International  Conference  on  Bioin-formatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics; August 20-23, 2017; Massachusetts,  MA:  ACM,  330-339.
- Mancini, M. C., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Sforça, D. A., and de Souza, A. P . (2018). 'Targeted sequencing by gene synteny,' a new strategy for polyploid species: sequencing  and  physical  structure  of  a  complex  sugarcane  region. Front. Plant  Sci. 9:397.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2018.00397
- Manning, G., Plowman, G. D., Hunter, T., and Sudarsanam, S. (2002). Evolution of  protein  kinase  signaling  from  yeast  to  man. Trends  Biochem.  Sci. 27, 514-520.  doi:  10.1016/S0968-0004(02)02179-5
- Marquardt,  A.,  Scalia,  G.,  Wathen-Dunn,  K.,  and  Botha,  F.  C.  (2017).  Yellow canopy  syndrome  (YCS)  in  sugarcane  is  associated  with  altered  carbon partitioning in the leaf. Sugar Tech 19, 647-655. doi: 10.1007/s12355-017-0555-1
- Meng,  X.,  and  Zhang,  S.  (2013).  MAPK  cascades  in  plant  disease  resistance signaling. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 51, 245-266. doi: 10.1146/annurevphyto-082712-102314
- Miller, M., Pfeiffer, W ., and Schwartz, T. (2010). 'Creating the cipres science gateway for inference of large phylogenetic trees' in 2010 Gateway Computing Environments Workshop  (GCE) ;  November  14,  2010;  New  Orleans,  LA:  IEEE,  1-8.
- Min, X. J. (2013). ASFinder: a tool for genome-wide identification of alternatively splicing transcripts from EST-derived sequences. Int. J. Bioinforma. Res. Appl. 9,  221-226.  doi:  10.1504/IJBRA.2013.053603
- Min,  X.  J.,  Powell,  B.,  Braessler,  J.,  Meinken,  J.,  Yu,  F.,  and  Sablok,  G.  (2015). Genome-wide cataloging and analysis of alternatively spliced genes in cereal crops. BMC  Genomics 16:721.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-015-1914-5
- Mitra,  K.,  Carvunis,  A.  R.,  Ramesh,  S.  K.,  and  Ideker,  T.  (2013).  Integrative approaches  for  finding  modular  structure  in  biological  networks. Nat.  Rev. Genet. 14,  719-732.  doi:  10.1038/nrg3552
- Moniz, L., Dutt, P .,  Haider,  N.,  and  Stambolic,  V .  (2011).  Nek  family  of  kinases in cell cycle, checkpoint control and cancer. Cell Div. 6:18. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-6-18
- Monreal, J. A., Arias-Baldrich, C., Pérez-Montaño, F., Gandullo, J., Echevarría, C., and García-Mauriño, S. (2013). Factors involved in the rise of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase-kinase activity caused by salinity in sorghum leaves. Planta 237,  1401-1413.  doi:  10.1007/s00425-013-1855-7
- Mutti,  J.  S.,  Bhullar,  R.  K.,  and  Gill,  K.  S.  (2017).  Evolution  of  gene  expression balance  among  homeologs  of  natural  polyploids. G3 7,  1225-1237.  doi: 10.1534/g3.116.038711
- Nagaraju, M., Reddy, P. S., Kumar, S. A., Kumar, A., Rajasheker, G., Rao, D. M., et  al.  (2020).  Genome-wide  identification  and  transcriptional  profiling  of small  heat  shock  protein  gene  family  under  diverse  abiotic  stress  conditions in Sorghum bicolor (L.). Int.  J.  Biol.  Macromol. 142,  822-834.  doi:  10.1016/j. ijbiomac.2019.10.023
- Nhiri,  M.,  Bakrim,  N.,  Pacquit,  V .,  Hachimi-Messouak,  Z.  E.,  Osuna,  L.,  and Vidal, J. (1998). Calcium-dependent and -independent phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinases in sorghum leaves: further evidence for the involvement of the calcium-independent protein kinase in the in situ regulatory phosphorylation  of  c4  phosphoenolpyruvate  carboxylase. Plant  Cell  Physiol. 39,  241-246.  doi:  10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029363
- Niedner,  R.  H.,  Buzko,  O.  V .,  Haste,  N.  M.,  Taylor,  A.,  Gribskov,  M.,  and Taylor,  S.  S.  (2006).  Protein  kinase  resource:  an  integrated  environment  for phosphorylation  research. Proteins 63,  78-86.  doi:  10.1002/prot.20825
- Okura,  V.  K.,  de  Souza,  R.  S.,  de  Siqueira  Tada,  S.  F.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2016). BAC-pool  sequencing  and  assembly  of  19  Mb  of  the  complex  sugarcane genome. Front.  Plant  Sci. 7:342.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00342
- Pagariya,  M.  C.,  Devarumath,  R.  M.,  and  Kawar,  P .  G.  (2012).  Biochemical characterization and identification of differentially expressed candidate genes in salt stressed sugarcane. Plant Sci. 184, 1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.12.002
- Panje, R. R., and  Babu,  C.  N. (1960). Studies in Saccharum  spontaneum distribution and geographical association of chromosome numbers. Cytologia 25,  152-172.  doi:  10.1508/cytologia.25.152
- Papini-Terzi,  F. S., Rocha,  F.  R., Nicoliello Vêncio,  R.  Z., Oliveira, K. C., de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Vicentini,  R.,  et  al.  (2005).  Transcription  profiling  of signal  transduction-related  genes  in  sugarcane  tissues. DNA Res. 12,  27-38. doi:  10.1093/dnares/12.1.27
- Parra-Londono, S., Fiedler, K., Kavka, M., Samans, B., Wieckhorst, S., Zacharias, A., et  al.  (2018).  Genetic  dissection  of  early-season  cold  tolerance  in  sorghum: genome-wide association studies for seedling emergence and survival under field and controlled environment conditions. Theor. Appl. Genet. 131, 581-595. doi:  10.1007/s00122-017-3021-2
- Patade,  V .  Y.,  Rai,  A.  N.,  and  Suprasanna,  P .  (2011).  Expression  analysis  of sugarcane shaggy-like kinase (SuSK) gene identified through cDNA subtractive hybridization  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Protoplasma 248, 613-621.  doi:  10.1007/s00709-010-0207-8
- Paterson,  A.  H.,  Bowers,  J.  E.,  Bruggmann,  R.,  Dubchak,  I.,  Grimwood,  J., Gundlach, H., et al. (2009). The Sorghum bicolor genome and the diversification of  grasses. Nature 457,  551-556.  doi:  10.1038/nature07723
- Patro,  R.,  Duggal,  G.,  and  Kingsford,  C.  (2015).  Salmon:  accurate,  versatile and ultrafast quantification from RNA-seq data using lightweight-alignment. Biorxiv  [preprint].  doi:  10.1101/021592
- Paungfoo-Lonhienne, C., Lonhienne, T. G., Yeoh, Y. K., Donose, B. C., Webb, R. I., Parsons,  J.,  et  al.  (2016).  Crosstalk  between  sugarcane  and  a  plant-growth promoting Burkholderia species. Sci.  Rep. 6:37389.  doi:  10.1038/srep37389
- Pei,  G.  L.,  Jun,  G.,  Wang,  Q.  H.,  and  Kang,  Z.  S.  (2019).  Comparative  analysis of protein kinases and associated domains between Ascomycota and Basidiomycota . J. Integr. Agric. 18, 96-107. doi: 10.1016/S2095-3119(18)62022-2
- Pestenácz, A., and Erdei, L. (1996). Calcium-dependent protein kinase in maize and  sorghum  induced  by  polyethylene  glycol. Physiol.  Plant. 97,  360-364. doi:  10.1034/j.1399-3054.1996.970221.x
- Petersen, T. N., Brunak, S., Von Heijne, G., and Nielsen, H. (2011). SignalP 4.0: discriminating  signal  peptides  from  transmembrane  regions. Nat.  Methods 8,  785-786.  doi:  10.1038/nmeth.1701
- Premachandran,  M.  N.,  Prathima,  P .  T.,  and  Lekshmi,  M.  (2011).  Sugarcane and  polyploidy:  a  review. J.  Sugarcane  Res. 1,  1-15.
- Price,  M.  N.,  Dehal,  P .  S.,  and  Arkin,  A.  P .  (2010).  FastTree  2-approximately maximum-likelihood  trees  for  large  alignments. PLoS  One 5:e9490.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009490
- Raghavan, U. N., Albert, R., and Kumara, S. (2007). Near linear time algorithm to detect community structures in large-scale networks. Phys. Rev. E 76:036106. doi:  10.1103/PhysRevE.76.036106
- R  Core  Team  (2013). R:  A  language  and  environment  for  statistical  computing . Vienna,  Austria:  R  Foundation  for  Statistical  Computing.
- Santa Brigida, A. B., Rojas, C. A., Grativol, C., de Armas, E. M., Entenza, J. O., Thiebaut,  F.,  et  al.  (2016).  Sugarcane  transcriptome  analysis  in  response  to

- infection caused by Acidovorax avenae subsp. avenae. PLoS One 11:e0166473. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0166473
- Schmutz,  J.,  Cannon,  S.  B.,  Schlueter,  J.,  Ma,  J.,  Mitros,  T.,  Nelson,  W .,  et  al. (2010).  Genome  sequence  of  the  palaeopolyploid  soybean. Nature 463, 178-183.  doi:  10.1038/nature08670
- Serin,  E.  A.  R.,  Nijveen,  H.,  Hilhorst,  H.  W .  M.,  and  Ligterink,  W .  (2016). Learning  from  co-expression  networks:  possibilities  and  challenges. Front. Plant  Sci. 7:444.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00444
- Serna-Saldívar, S. O., Chuck-Hernández, C., Pérez-Carrillo, E., and Heredia-Olea, E. (2012).  'Sorghum  as  a  multifunctional  crop  for  the  production  of  fuel ethanol:  current  status  and  future  trends'  in Bioethanol .  ed.  M.  A.  P .  Lima (Rijeka,  Croatia:  IntechOpen),  51-74.
- Sforça, D. A., Vautrin, S., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Mancini, M. C., Romero-da Cruz, M. V., and Pereira, G. d. S., et al.  (2019). Gene duplication in  the  sugarcane  genome:  a  case  study  of  allele  interactions  and  evolutionary patterns in two genic regions. Front. Plant Sci. 10:553. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00553
- Shi,  Y .,  Xu,  H.,  Shen,  Q.,  Lin,  J.,  W ang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  et  al.  (2019).  Comparative analysis  of  SUS  gene  family  between Saccharum  officinarum and Saccharum spontaneum . Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  174-185.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09230-6
- Singh,  D.  K.,  Calviño,  M.,  Brauer,  E.  K.,  Fernandez-Pozo,  N.,  Strickler,  S., Yalamanchili,  R.,  et  al.  (2014).  The  tomato  kinome  and  the  tomato  kinase library ORFeome:  novel  resources  for  the  study  of  kinases and  signal transduction  in  tomato  and  solanaceae  species. Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 27,  7-17.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-08-13-0218-TA
- Sperschneider, J., Catanzariti, A.-M., DeBoer, K., Petre, B., Gardiner, D. M., Singh, K. B., et  al.  (2017).  LOCALIZER:  subcellular  localization  prediction  of  both  plant  and effector  proteins  in  the  plant  cell. Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-14.  doi:  10.1038/srep44598
- Srivastava,  S.,  and  Kumar,  P .  (2020).  ' Abiotic  stress  responses  and  tolerance mechanisms  for  sustaining  crop  productivity  in  sugarcane'  in Agronomic crops .  eds.  S.  Naz,  Z.  Fatima,  P .  Iqbal,  A.  Khan,  I.  Zakir,  S.  Noreen  et  al. (Singapore:  Springer),  29-47.
- Su, W., Huang, L., Ling, H., Mao, H., Huang, N., Su, Y., et al. (2020b). Sugarcane calcineurin B-like (CBL) genes play important but versatile roles in regulation of  responses  to  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses. Sci.  Rep. 10,  1-13.  doi:  10.1038/ s41598-019-57058-7
- Su,  W.,  Ren,  Y.,  Wang,  D.,  Su,  Y.,  Feng,  J.,  Zhang,  C.,  et  al.  (2020a).  The alcohol  dehydrogenase  gene  family  in  sugarcane  and  its  involvement  in cold stress regulation. BMC Genomics 21:521. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-06929-9
- Supek, F., Bo š njak,  M., Š kunca, N., and Š muc, T. (2011). REVIGO summarizes and  visualizes  long  lists  of  gene  ontology  terms. PLoS  One 6:e21800.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021800
- Tai,  Y.,  Liu,  C.,  Yu,  S.,  Y ang,  H.,  Sun,  J.,  Guo,  C.,  et  al.  (2018).  Gene  coexpression network analysis reveals coordinated regulation of three characteristic secondary  biosynthetic pathways  in tea plant ( Camellia sinensis ). BMC Genomics 19:616.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-018-4999-9
- Takatani,  S.,  Otani,  K.,  Kanazawa,  M.,  Takahashi,  T.,  and  Motose,  H.  (2015). Structure, function, and evolution of plant NIMA-related kinases: implication for  phosphorylation-dependent  microtubule  regulation. J.  Plant  Res. 128, 875-891.  doi:  10.1007/s10265-015-0751-6
- Tan,  S.  T.,  and  Xue,  H.  W .  (2014).  Casein  kinase  1  regulates  ethylene  synthesis by  phosphorylating  and  promoting  the  turnover  of  ACS5. Cell  Rep. 9, 1692-1702.  doi:  10.1016/j.celrep.2014.10.047
- Teich,  R.,  Grauvogel,  C.,  and  Petersen,  J.  (2007).  Intron  distribution  in  Plantae: 500  million  years  of  stasis  during  land  plant  evolution. Gene 394,  96-104. doi:  10.1016/j.gene.2007.02.011
- Teixeira,  E.  I.,  Fischer,  G.,  van  Velthuizen,  H.,  Walter,  C.,  and  Ewert,  F.  (2013). Global  hot-spots  of  heat  stress  on  agricultural  crops  due  to  climate  change. Agric.  For.  Meteorol. 170,  206-215.  doi:  10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.09.002
- Thirugnanasambandam,  P.  P.,  Hoang,  N.  V .,  Furtado,  A.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and Henry,  R.  J.  (2017).  Association  of  variation  in  the  sugarcane  transcriptome with  sugar  content. BMC Genomics 18:909.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-017-4302-5
- Tuleski,  T.  R.,  Kimball,  J.,  Do  Amaral,  F.  P .,  Pereira,  T.  P .,  Tadra-Sfeir,  M.  Z., de  Oliveira  Pedrosa,  F.,  et  al.  (2020). Herbaspirillum  rubrisubalbicans as  a phytopathogenic  model  to  study  the  immune  system  of Sorghum  bicolor . Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 33,  235-246.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-06-19-0154-R
- UniProt  Consortium  (2007).  The  universal  protein  resource  (UniProt). Nucleic Acids  Res. 36,  D190-D195.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm895
- Usha Kiranmayee, K. N. S., Hash, C. T., Kavi Kishor, P . B., Ramu, P ., Sivasubramani, S., Sakhale,  S.  A.,  et  al.  (2017).  'Fine  mapping  of  stay-green  QTLs  on  sorghum
- chromosome SBI-10L-an approach from genome to phenome' in InterDrought-V ; February  21-25,  2017;  Hyderabad,  India:  ICRISAT,  235.
- Vaid,  N.,  Pandey,  P .  K.,  and  Tuteja,  N.  (2016).  'Lectin  receptor-like  kinases and their  emerging  role  in  abiotic  stress  tolerance'  in Abiotic  stress  response in  plants .  eds.  N.  Tuteja  and  S.  Gill  (Weinheim,  Germany:  Wiley-VCH Verlag  GmbH  &amp;  Co.),  456.
- van  Dam,  S.,  Vosa,  U.,  van  der  Graaf,  A.,  Franke,  L.,  and  de  Magalhaes,  J.  P . (2018).  Gene  co-expression  analysis  for  functional  classification  and  genedisease  predictions. Brief.  Bioinform. 19,  575-592.  doi:  10.1093/bib/bbw139
- Varberg,  J.  M.,  Coppens,  I.,  Arrizabalaga,  G.,  and  Gaji,  R.  Y.  (2018).  TgTKL1 is  a  unique  plant-like  nuclear  kinase  that  plays  an  essential  role  in  acute toxoplasmosis. MBio 9,  e00301-e00318.  doi:  10.1128/mBio.00301-18
- Varoquaux,  N.,  Cole,  B.,  Gao,  C.,  Pierroz,  G.,  Baker,  C.  R.,  Patel,  D.,  et  al. (2019).  Transcriptomic  analysis  of  field-droughted  sorghum  from  seedling to  maturity  reveals  biotic  and  metabolic  responses. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U.  S.  A. 116,  27124-27132.  doi:  10.1073/pnas.1907500116
- Vettore,  A.  L.,  da  Silva,  F.  R.,  Kemper,  E.  L.,  Souza,  G.  M.,  da  Silva,  A.  M., Ferro,  M.  I.  T.,  et  al.  (2003).  Analysis  and  functional  annotation  of  an expressed  sequence  tag  collection  for  tropical  crop  sugarcane. Genome  Res. 13,  2725-2735.  doi:  10.1101/gr.1532103
- Vicentini,  R.,  de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Dornelas,  M.  C.,  and  Menossi,  M.  (2009). Characterization  of  a  sugarcane  ( Saccharum spp.)  gene  homolog  to  the brassinosteroid  insensitive1-associated  receptor  kinase  1  that  is  associated to sugar content. Plant Cell Rep. 28, 481-491. doi: 10.1007/s00299-008-0656-0
- Vikal,  Y.,  Kaur,  A.,  Jindal,  J.,  Kaur,  K.,  Pathak,  D.,  Garg,  T.,  et  al.  (2020). Identification  of  genomic  regions  associated  with  shoot  fly  resistance  in maize  and  their  syntenic  relationships  in  the Sorghum genome. PLoS  One 15:e0234335.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0234335
- Villanueva,  R.  A.  M.,  and  Chen,  Z.  J.  (2019).  ggplot2:  elegant  graphics  for data analysis (2nd ed.). Meas. Interdiscip. Res. Pers. 17, 160-167. doi: 10.1080/15366367.2019.1565254
- Voorrips,  R.  E.  (2002).  MapChart:  software  for  the  graphical  presentation  of linkage  maps  and  QTLs. J.  Hered. 93,  77-78.  doi:  10.1093/jhered/93.1.77
- Wang,  H.,  Gu,  L.,  Zhang,  X.,  Liu,  M.,  Jiang,  H.,  Cai,  R.,  et  al.  (2018).  Global transcriptome  and  weighted  gene  co-expression  network  analyses  reveal hybrid-specific modules and candidate genes related to plant height development in  maize. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 98,  187-203.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-018-0763-4
- Wang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  Xu,  J.,  Chen,  Z.,  Fan,  T .,  Zeng,  Z.,  et  al.  (2019c).  Comparative genomics  revealed  the  gene  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  magnesium transporter families in Saccharum . BMC Genomics 20:83. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5437-3
- Wang,  J.,  Li,  Y.,  Zhu,  F.,  Ming,  R.,  and  Chen,  L.  Q.  (2019b).  Genome-wide analysis of nitrate  transporter  (nrt/npf)  family  in  sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Trop. Plant Biol. 12, 133-149. doi: 10.1007/s12042-019-09220-8
- Wang,  J.,  Roe,  B.,  Macmil,  S.,  Yu,  Q.,  Murray,  J.  E.,  Tang,  H.,  et  al.  (2010). Microcollinearity  between  autopolyploid  sugarcane  and  diploid  sorghum genomes. BMC  Genomics 11:261.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2164-11-261
- Wang,  Y.,  Tang,  H.,  DeBarry,  J.  D.,  Tan,  X.,  Li,  J.,  Wang,  X.,  et  al.  (2012). MCScanX: a toolkit for detection  and  evolutionary  analysis  of  gene  synteny and  collinearity. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40:e49.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr1293
- Wang,  H.,  Wang,  Y.,  Xiao,  N.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  M.,  Ming,  R.,  et  al.  (2019a). NAC transcription factors in autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum :  genomewide  identification,  expression  pattern  and  a  'Dry' orthologous  gene. Res.  Sq. 1-37  [Preprint].  doi:  10.21203/rs.2.17032/v1
- Wang,  T.  J.,  Wang,  X.  H.,  and  Yang,  Q.  H.  (2020).  Comparative  analysis  of drought-responsive transcriptome in different genotype Saccharum spontaneum L. Sugar  Tech 22,  411-427.  doi:  10.1007/s12355-019-00774-1
- Wei,  K.,  Wang,  Y.,  and  Xie,  D.  (2014).  Identification  and  expression  profile analysis  of  the  protein  kinase  gene  superfamily  in  maize  development. Mol. Breed. 33,  155-172.  doi:  10.1007/s11032-013-9941-x
- Xiong,  J.,  Cui,  X.,  Y uan,  X.,  Y u,  X.,  Sun,  J.,  and  Gong,  Q.  (2016).  The  hippo/STE20 homolog SIK1 interacts with MOB1 to regulate cell proliferation and cell expansion in Arabidopsis . J.  Exp.  Bot. 67,  1461-1475.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erv538
- Xu,  G.,  Guo,  C.,  Shan,  H.,  and  Kong,  H.  (2012).  Divergence  of  duplicate  genes in  exon-intron  structure. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A. 109,  1187-1192. doi:  10.1073/pnas.1109047109
- Xu,  S., Wang,  J., Shang,  H.,  Huang,  Y.,  Yao,  W .,  Chen,  B.,  et al.  (2018). Transcriptomic characterization and potential marker development of contrasting sugarcane cultivars. Sci. Rep. 8, 1-11. doi: 10.1038/ s41598-018-19832-x

- Yan,  J.,  Li,  G.,  Guo,  X.,  Li,  Y .,  and  Cao,  X.  (2018).  Genome-wide  classification, evolutionary analysis and gene expression patterns of the kinome in Gossypium . PLoS  One 13:e0197392.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0197392
- Yan, J., Su, P ., Wei, Z., Nevo, E., and Kong, L. (2017). Genome-wide identification, classification,  evolutionary  analysis  and  gene  expression  patterns  of  the protein  kinase  gene  family  in  wheat  and Aegilops  tauschii . Plant  Mol.  Biol. 95,  227-242.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-017-0637-1
- Yu,  C.  S.,  Chen,  Y.  C.,  Lu,  C.  H.,  and  Hwang,  J.  K.  (2006).  Prediction  of protein subcellular localization. Proteins 64, 643-651. doi: 10.1002/prot.21018
- Yu,  G.,  Smith,  D.  K.,  Zhu,  H.,  Guan,  Y.,  and  Lam,  T.  T.  Y.  (2017).  ggtree:  an R  package  for  visualization  and  annotation  of  phylogenetic  trees  with  their covariates  and  other  associated  data. Methods  Ecol.  Evol. 8,  28-36.  doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.12628
- Zhang,  Z.,  Li,  J.,  Zhao,  X.  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Wong,  G.  K.  S.,  and  Yu,  J.  (2006). KaKs\_calculator: calculating Ka and Ks through model selection and model averaging. Genom. Proteom. Bioinform. 4, 259-263. doi: 10.1016/ S1672-0229(07)60007-2
- Zhang,  W.,  Lin,  J.,  Dong,  F.,  Ma,  Q.,  Wu,  S.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2019b).  Genomic and  allelic  analyses  of  laccase  genes  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  spontaneum L.). Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  219-229.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09239-x
- Zhang,  C.,  Wang,  J.,  Tao,  H.,  Dang,  X.,  Wang,  Y.,  Chen,  M.,  et  al.  (2015). FvBck1, a component of cell wall integrity MAP kinase pathway, is required for  virulence  and  oxidative  stress  response  in  sugarcane  Pokkah  Boeng pathogen. Front.  Microbiol. 6:1096.  doi:  10.3389/fmicb.2015.01096
- Zhang,  H.,  and  Yin,  T.  (2020).  Analysis  of  topology  properties  in  different tissues of poplar based on gene co-expression networks. Tree Genet. Genomes 16:6.  doi:  10.1007/s11295-019-1400-3
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Li,  L.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Chen,  Y.,  et  al.  (2019a). Recent  polyploidization  events  in  three Saccharum founding  species. Plant Biotechnol.  J. 17,  264-274.  doi:  10.1111/pbi.12962
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  X.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Hua,  X.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2018). Allele-defined genome of the autopolyploid sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Nat.  Genet. 50,  1565-1573.  doi:  10.1038/s41588-018-0237-2
- Zhao,  W.,  Langfelder,  P .,  Fuller,  T.,  Dong,  J.,  Li,  A.,  and  Hovarth,  S.  (2010). Weighted  gene  coexpression  network  analysis:  state  of  the  art. J.  Biopharm. Stat. 20,  281-300.  doi:  10.1080/10543400903572753
- Zhu,  K.,  Liu,  H.,  Chen,  X.,  Cheng,  Q.,  and  Cheng,  Z.  M.  M.  (2018a).  The kinome  of  pineapple:  catalog  and  insights  into  functions  in  crassulacean acid metabolism plants. BMC Plant Biol. 18:199. doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1389-z
- Zhu,  K.,  Wang,  X.,  Liu,  J.,  Tang,  J.,  Cheng,  Q.,  Chen,  J.  G.,  et  al.  (2018b). The  grapevine  kinome:  annotation,  classification  and  expression  patterns  in developmental  processes  and  stress  responses. Hortic.  Res. 5,  1-16.  doi: 10.1038/s41438-018-0027-0
- Zou,  X.,  Liu,  A.,  Zhang,  Z.,  Ge,  Q.,  Fan,  S.,  Gong,  W .,  et  al.  (2019).  Coexpression  network  analysis  and  hub  gene  selection  for  high-quality  fiber in  upland  cotton  ( Gossypium  hirsutum )  using  RNA  sequencing  analysis. Gene 10:119.  doi:  10.3390/genes10020119
- Zulawski, M., and Schulze, W. X. (2015). 'The plant kinome' in Plant Phosphoproteomics .  ed.  W .  Schulze  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  1-23.
- Zulawski,  M.,  Schulze,  G.,  Braginets,  R.,  Hartmann,  S.,  and  Schulze,  W .  X. (2014).  The Arabidopsis kinome:  phylogeny  and  evolutionary  insights  into functional diversification. BMC Genomics 15:548. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-548

Conflict  of  Interest: The  authors  declare  that  the  research  was  conducted  in the  absence  of  any  commercial  or  financial  relationships  that  could  be  construed as  a  potential  conflict  of  interest.

Copyright  ©  2021 Aono,  Pimenta,  Garcia,  Correr,  Hosaka,  Carrasco,  Cardoso-Silva, Mancini,  Sforça,  dos  Santos,  Nagai,  Pinto,  Landell,  Carneiro,  Balsalobre,  Quiles, Pereira,  Rodrigues  Alves  Margarido  and  de  Souza.  This  is  an  open-access  article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  in  other  forums  is  permitted,  provided  the original  author(s)  and  the  copyright  owner(s)  are  credited  and  that  the  original publication  in  this  journal  is  cited,  in  accordance  with  accepted  academic  practice. No  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  is  permitted  which  does  not  comply  with these  terms.

## GLOSSARY

| Aco            | Aquilegia coerulea                                                                                                           |
|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AGC            | Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (cAPK), cGMP-dependent protein kinase, and lipid signaling kinase families               |
| Aly            | Arabidopsis lyrata                                                                                                           |
| Ath            | Arabidopsis thaliana                                                                                                         |
| B-lectin       | D-mannose-binding lectin                                                                                                     |
| Bdi            | Brachypodium distachyon                                                                                                      |
| CAMK           | Calcium- and calmodulin-regulated kinase                                                                                     |
| Ccl            | Citrus clementina                                                                                                            |
| CDS            | DNA coding sequence                                                                                                          |
| CK1            | Casein kinase 1                                                                                                              |
| CMGC           | Cyclin-dependent kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, glycogen synthase kinase, and cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinase |
| Cpa            | Carica papaya                                                                                                                |
| Cre            | Chlamydomonas reinhardtii                                                                                                    |
| Csa            | Cucumis sativus                                                                                                              |
| Csi            | Citrus sinensis                                                                                                              |
| DUF26          | Domain of Unknown Function 26                                                                                                |
| Egr            | Eucalyptus grandis                                                                                                           |
| ER             | Endoplasmic reticulum                                                                                                        |
| GM             | Gene model                                                                                                                   |
| Gma            | Glycine max                                                                                                                  |
| GO             | Gene Ontology                                                                                                                |
| GUB            | Galacturonan-binding                                                                                                         |
| HMM            | Hidden Markov model                                                                                                          |
| IRE1           | Inositol-requiring kinase 1                                                                                                  |
| Ka             | Nonsynonymous substitution rates                                                                                             |
| Ks             | Synonymous substitution rates                                                                                                |
| LRR            | Leucine-rich repeat                                                                                                          |
| LRRNT          | Leucine-rich repeat N-terminal domain                                                                                        |
| Mes            | Manihot esculenta                                                                                                            |
| Mgu            | Mimulus guttatus                                                                                                             |
| Mtr            | Medicago truncatula                                                                                                          |
| MW             | Molecular weight                                                                                                             |
| MYA            | Million years ago                                                                                                            |
| Osa            | Oryza sativa kinase                                                                                                          |
| PEK            | Pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha                                                                               |
| PK             | Protein kinase                                                                                                               |
| pI             | Isoelectric point                                                                                                            |
| Ppa            | Physcomitrella patens                                                                                                        |
| Ppe Ptr        | Prunus persica Populus trichocarpa                                                                                           |
| Rco            | Ricinus communis                                                                                                             |
| RLK            | Receptor-like kinase                                                                                                         |
| S-locus-glycop |                                                                                                                              |
|                | S-locus glycoprotein                                                                                                         |
| Sit            | Setaria italica                                                                                                              |
| Smo            | Selaginella moellendorffii                                                                                                   |
|                | Saccharum spontaneum                                                                                                         |
| Ssp            |                                                                                                                              |
| STE TKL        | Serine/threonine kinase Tyrosine kinase-like kinase                                                                          |
| TPM            | Transcripts per million                                                                                                      |
| Vca            | Volvox carteri                                                                                                               |
| Vvi            | Vitis vinifera                                                                                                               |
| WAK WGD        | Wall-associated receptor kinase Whole-genome duplication                                                                     |
| Zma            | Zea mays                                                                                                                     |
MATERIALS
## MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

## Sugarcane  Plant  Material  and  RNA-Seq

Sugarcane  hybrids  and S.  officinarum and  Ssp  clones  were  used for expression analyses in sugarcane. Four independent experiments were  performed  and  are  detailed  in Supplementary  Table  2 . Experiment  1  was  based  on  root  material  from  the  RB867515, RB92579, RB855113, RB855536, SP79-1011, and SP80-3280 hybrid cultivars.  This  trial  was  carried  out  in  a  greenhouse  with  three replicates per cultivar in a completely randomized design. Plants were grown in 18-L plastic pots with a mixture of 20% commercial planting  mix  and  80%  sand.  Ninety-five  days  after  planting, we sampled the root material of each plant, avoiding tiller roots.

Experiments  2  and  3  were  performed  with  leaf  and  culm (internode  1)  samples,  respectively,  from  plants  grown  in  the field  in  Araras,  Brazil  (22 ° 18 ' 41.0 '' and  23 ' 05.0 '' W,  at  an altitude  of  611  m).  Leaf  samples  were  collected  from  portions of the top visible dewlap leaves (+1) of 6-month-old sugarcane plants  in  April  2016.  We  collected  the  middle  section  of  each leaf,  removing  the  midrib.  For  culms,  samples  from  the  first internode  were  collected  at  four  time  points  in  2016:  April (synchronous  with  leaf  sampling),  June,  August,  and  October.

In Experiment 2, described by Correr et al. (2020), we used samples  from  the  SP80-3280,  RB72454,  and  RB855156  hybrid cultivars; TUC71-7 and US85-1008 hybrids; White Transparent and Criolla Rayada S. officinarum genotypes; IN84-58, IN84-88, Krakatau, and SES205A Ssp genotypes; and IJ76-318 Saccharum robustum genotypes.  For  six  genotypes  -  SP80-3280,  RB72454, US85-1008, White Transparent, IN84-58, and SES205A -we  collected  and  sequenced  three  biological  replicates,  while the  others  were  represented  by  one  biological  replicate;  all samples  were  represented  by  three  technical  replicates.  Leaf samples  were  sequenced  in  two  lanes.  In  Experiment  3,  culm samples  were  collected  from  the  SP80-3280  and  R570  hybrid cultivars, F36-819 hybrid, and IN84-58 S. spontaneum genotype. Culm  samples  were  sequenced  in  six  lanes.

Experiment  4  was  based  on  samples  from  the  SP80-3280 and IACSP93-3046 hybrid cultivars, Badila De Java S. officinarum genotype,  and  Krakatau  Ssp  genotype.  RNA  samples  were extracted  in  triplicate  from  the  top  (internode  3)  and  bottom (internode  8)  culms  and  collected  in  the  field  in  Ribeirão Preto,  Brazil  (21 ° 12 ' 28.7 '' S,  47 ° 52 ' 29.1 '' W)  in  June  2016.

After  collection,  samples  were  immediately  frozen  in  liquid nitrogen  and  stored  at -80 ° C  until  processed.  Total  RNA  was extracted  from  200  mg  of  ground  roots  and  50  mg  of  ground leaves or culms using an RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,  United  States).  We  quantified  the  RNA  and  verified  its integrity  in  a  2100  BioAnalyzer  using  a  Eukaryote  Total  RNA Nano Assay (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States). A total of 300 ng of RNA per sample was used to prepare cDNA libraries  with  a  TruSeq  Stranded  mRNA  LT  Kit  (Illumina,  San Diego, CA, United States). Libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 platform  (Illumina,  San  Diego,  CA,  United  States).

## SUPPLEMENTARY  MATERIAL

The  Supplementary  Figures  and  Tables  for  this  article  have been  deposited  in  Figshare  (https://figshare.com/):  https://doi. org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5122460.v2. The Supplementary Results section  can  be  found  online  at:  https://www.frontiersin.org/ articles/10.3389/fpls.2021.668623/full#supplementary-material

- Champion,  A.,  Kreis,  M.,  Mockaitis,  K.,  Picaud,  A.,  and  Henry,  Y.  (2004). Arabidopsis kinome:  after  the  casting. Funct.  Integr.  Genom. 4,  163-187.  doi: 10.1007/s10142-003-0096-4
- Clayton,  W .  D.  (1987).  ' Andropogoneae'  in Grass  systematics  and  evolution .  ed. T. R. Soderstrom (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institutional Press), 307-309. Conesa,  A.,  Götz,  S.,  García-Gómez,  J.  M.,  Terol,  J.,  Talón,  M.,  and  Robles,  M. (2005).  Blast2GO:  a  universal  tool  for  annotation,  visualization  and  analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21,  3674-3676. doi: 10.1093/ bioinformatics/bti610
- Correr,  F.  H.,  Hosaka,  G.  K.,  Barreto,  F.  Z.,  Valadão,  I.  B.,  Balsalobre,  T.  W .  A., Furtado,  A.,  et  al.  (2020).  Differential  expression  in  leaves  of Saccharum genotypes  contrasting  in  biomass  production  provides  evidence  of  genes involved in carbon partitioning. BMC  Genomics 21:673. doi: 10.1186/ s12864-020-07091-y
- Csardi,  G.,  and  Nepusz,  T.  (2006).  The  igraph  software  package  for  complex network  research. InterJ.  Complex  Syst. 1695,  1-9.
- Dai,  A.  (2013).  Increasing  drought  under  global  warming  in  observations  and models. Nat.  Clim.  Chang. 3,  52-58.  doi:  10.1038/nclimate1633
- Dardick,  C.,  Chen,  J.,  Richter,  T.,  Ouyang,  S.,  and  Ronald,  P .  (2007).  The  rice kinase database. A phylogenomic database for the rice kinome. Plant Physiol. 143,  579-586.  doi:  10.1104/pp.106.087270
- De  Souza  Barbosa,  G.  V .,  Dos  Santos,  J.  M.,  Diniz,  C.  A.,  Cursi,  D.  E.,  and Hoffmann,  H.  P.  (2020).  'Energy  cane  breeding'  in Sugarcane  biorefinery, technology  and  perspectives .  eds.  F.  Santos,  S.  Rabelo,  M.  De  Matos  and P.  Eichler  (London,  UK:  Elsevier),  103-116.
- Dezhsetan,  S.  (2017).  Genome  scanning  for  identification  and  mapping  of receptor-like  kinase  (RLK)  gene  superfamily  in Solanum tuberosum . Physiol. Mol.  Biol.  Plants 23,  755-765.  doi:  10.1007/s12298-017-0471-6
- Dharshini, S., Hoang, N. V ., Mahadevaiah, C., Padmanabhan, T. S., Alagarasan, G., Suresha, G., et al. (2020). Root transcriptome analysis of Saccharum spontaneum uncovers  key  genes  and  pathways  in  response  to  low-temperature  stress. Environ.  Exp.  Bot. 171:103935.  doi:  10.1016/j.envexpbot.2019.103935
- D'Hont, A., Ison, D., Alix, K., Roux, C., and Glaszmann, J. C. (1998). Determination of basic chromosome numbers in the genus Saccharum by  physical mapping of  ribosomal  RNA  genes. Genome 41,  221-225.  doi:  10.1139/g98-023
- Ding,  Z., Fu, L., Tan, D., Sun, X., and  Zhang,  J. (2020). An  integrative transcriptomic  and  genomic  analysis  reveals  novel  insights  into  the  hub genes and  regulatory networks  associated with rubber synthesis in H. brasiliensis . Ind.  Crop.  Prod. 153:112562.  doi:  10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112562
- Dugas,  D.  V .,  Monaco,  M.  K.,  Olson,  A.,  Klein,  R.  R.,  Kumari,  S.,  Ware,  D., et  al.  (2011).  Functional  annotation  of  the  transcriptome  of Sorghum bicolor

- in  response  to  osmotic  stress  and  abscisic  acid. BMC Genomics 12:514.  doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-514
- Dunn,  R.,  Dudbridge,  F.,  and  Sanderson,  C.  M.  (2005).  The  use  of  edgebetweenness clustering to investigate biological function in protein interaction networks. BMC  Bioinformatics 6:39.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2105-6-39
- Eddy,  S.  R.  (1998).  Profile  hidden  Markov  models. Bioinformatics 14,  755-763. doi:  10.1093/bioinformatics/14.9.755
- Edgar, R. C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and  high  throughput. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 32,  1792-1797.  doi:  10.1093/nar/ gkh340
- El-Gebali,  S.,  Mistry,  J.,  Bateman,  A.,  Eddy,  S.  R.,  Luciani,  A.,  Potter,  S.  C., et  al.  (2019).  The  Pfam  protein  families  database  in  2019. Nucleic  Acids Res. 47,  D427-D432.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gky995
- Falco, M.  C., Marbach,  P. A. S., Pompermayer,  P.,  Lopes, F. C. C.,  and Silva-Filho,  M.  C.  (2001).  Mechanisms  of  sugarcane  response  to  herbivory. Genet.  Mol.  Biol. 24,  113-122.  doi:  10.1590/S1415-47572001000100016
- FAO (2020). FAOSTAT: production sheet. Available at: http://www.fao.org/faostat/ en/#data  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Ficklin,  S.  P .,  and  Feltus,  F .  A.  (2011).  Gene  coexpression  network  alignment and  conservation  of  gene  modules  between  two  grass  species:  maize  and rice. Plant  Physiol. 156,  1244-1256.  doi:  10.1104/pp.111.173047
- Finn, R. D., Clements, J., and Eddy, S. R. (2011). HMMER web server: interactive sequence similarity searching. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, W29-W37. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkr367
- Freeling,  M.  (2009).  Bias  in  plant  gene  content  following  different  sorts  of duplication:  tandem,  whole-genome,  segmental,  or  by  transposition. Annu. Rev.  Plant  Biol. 60,  433-453.  doi:  10.1146/annurev.arplant.043008.092122
- Freeling, M., Scanlon, M.  J., and  Fowler, J. E. (2015). Fractionation  and subfunctionalization  following  genome  duplications:  mechanisms  that  drive gene  content  and  their  consequences. Curr.  Opin.  Genet.  Dev. 35,  110-118. doi:  10.1016/j.gde.2015.11.002
- Gaut, B. S., Morton, B. R., McCaig, B. C., and Clegg, M. T. (1996). Substitution rate  comparisons  between  grasses  and  palms:  synonymous  rate  differences at  the  nuclear  gene  Adh  parallel  rate  differences  at  the  plastid  gene  rbc  L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 10274-10279. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.19.10274
- Goel,  P .,  Sharma,  N.  K.,  Bhuria,  M.,  Sharma,  V .,  Chauhan,  R.,  Pathania,  S., et  al.  (2018).  Transcriptome  and  co-expression  network  analyses  identify key  genes  regulating  nitrogen  use  efficiency  in Brassica  juncea L. Sci.  Rep. 8,  1-18.  doi:  10.1038/s41598-018-25826-6
- Goodstein,  D.  M.,  Shu,  S.,  Howson,  R.,  Neupane,  R.,  Hayes,  R.  D.,  Fazo,  J., et  al.  (2012).  Phytozome:  a  comparative  platform  for  green  plant  genomics. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40,  D1178-D1186.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr944
- Gregory, P. J., Johnson, S. N., Newton, A. C., and Ingram, J. S. (2009). Integrating pests  and  pathogens  into  the  climate  change/food  security  debate. J.  Exp. Bot. 60,  2827-2838.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erp080
- Grivet,  L.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2002).  Sugarcane  genomics:  depicting  the  complex genome  of  an  important  tropical  crop. Curr.  Opin.  Plant  Biol. 5,  122-127. doi:  10.1016/S1369-5266(02)00234-0
- Guo,  H.,  Jiao,  Y.,  Tan,  X.,  Wang,  X.,  Huang,  X.,  Jin,  H.,  et  al.  (2019).  Gene duplication  and  genetic  innovation  in  cereal  genomes. Genome  Res. 29, 261-269.  doi:  10.1101/gr.237511.118
- Hanada,  K.,  Zou,  C.,  Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  Shinozaki,  K.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2008). Importance  of  lineage-specific  expansion  of  plant  tandem  duplicates  in  the adaptive  response  to  environmental  stimuli. Plant  Physiol. 148,  993-1003. doi:  10.1104/pp.108.122457
- Hanks, S. K., and Hunter, T. (1995). The eukaryotic protein kinase superfamily: kinase (catalytic) domain structure and classification 1. FASEB J. 9,  576-596. doi:  10.1096/fasebj.9.8.7768349
- Hasanuzzaman, M. (2020). Agronomic crops: Stress responses and tolerance .  New York,  NY:  Springer.
- Hoang,  N.  V.,  Furtado,  A.,  O'Keeffe,  A.  J.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and  Henry,  R.  J. (2017). Association of gene expression with biomass content and composition in  sugarcane. PLoS  One 12:e0183417.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0183417
- Hong, S., Chen, X., Jin, L., and Xiong, M. (2013). Canonical correlation analysis for RNA-seq co-expression networks. Nucleic Acids Res. 41:e95. doi: 10.1093/ nar/gkt145
- Horton,  P .,  Park,  K.  J.,  Obayashi,  T.,  Fujita,  N.,  Harada,  H.,  Adams-Collier,  C., et  al.  (2007).  WoLF  PSORT:  protein  localization  predictor. Nucleic  Acids Res. 35,  W585-W587.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm259
- Hu,  W.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Shen,  Q.,  Zhang,  X.,  et  al.  (2018).  New insights  into  the  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  the  SWEET  family in Saccharum based  on  comparative  genomics. BMC Plant Biol. 18:270.  doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1495-y
- Huang,  T.  L.,  Huang,  L.  Y.,  Fu,  S.  F.,  Trinh,  N.  N.,  and  Huang,  H.  J.  (2014). Genomic profiling  of  rice  roots  with  short-and  long-term  chromium  stress. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 86,  157-170.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-014-0219-4
- Huang,  X.,  Song,  X.,  Chen,  R.,  Zhang,  B.,  Li,  C.,  Liang,  Y.,  et  al.  (2020). Genome-wide  analysis  of  the  DREB  subfamily  in Saccharum  spontaneum reveals  their  functional  divergence  during  cold  and  drought  stresses. Front. Genet. 10:1326.  doi:  10.3389/fgene.2019.01326
- Hunter,  T.  (1995).  Protein  kinases  and  phosphatases:  the  Yin  and  Yang  of protein phosphorylation  and  signaling. Cell 80, 225-236.  doi: 10.1016/ 0092-8674(95)90405-0
- ISO (2020). International sugar organization. Available at: https://www.isosugar. org/sugarsector/sugar  (Accessed  March  26,  2021).
- Jain,  M.,  Li,  Q.  B.,  and  Chourey,  P .  S.  (2008).  Cloning  and  expression  analyses of sucrose non-fermenting-1-related kinase 1 (SnRK1b) gene during development  of  sorghum  and  maize  endosperm  and  its  implicated  role  in sugar-to-starch metabolic transition. Physiol. Plant. 134, 161-173. doi: 10.1111/j. 1399-3054.2008.01106.x
- Karpov, P. A., Sheremet, Y. A., Blume, Y. B., and Yemets, A. I. (2019). Studying the  role  of  protein  kinases  CK1  in  organization  of  cortical  microtubules  in Arabidopsis  thaliana root  cells. Cytol.  Genet. 53,  441-450.  doi:  10.3103/ S0095452719060033
- Kasirajan,  L.,  Valiyaparambth,  R.,  Velu,  J.,  Hari,  H.,  Srinivasavedantham,  V ., and Athaiappan, S. (2020). Gene expression studies of Saccharum spontaneum , a  wild  relative  of  sugarcane  in  response  to  salinity  stress. Biotechnol.  Appl. Biochem. doi:  10.1002/bab.1923  [Epub  ahead  of  print]
- Kebrom,  T.  H.,  McKinley,  B.,  and  Mullet,  J.  E.  (2017).  Dynamics  of  gene expression during development and expansion of vegetative stem internodes of bioenergy sorghum. Biotechnol. Biofuels 10, 1-16. doi: 10.1186/ s13068-017-0848-3
- Kim,  C.,  Wang,  X.,  Lee,  T.  H.,  Jakob,  K.,  Lee,  G.  J.,  and  Paterson,  A.  H. (2014).  Comparative analysis  of Miscanthus and Saccharum reveals  a  shared whole-genome  duplication  but  different  evolutionary  fates. Plant  Cell 26, 2420-2429.  doi:  10.1105/tpc.114.125583
- Kimura, M., and Ishikawa, T. (2018). Suppression of DYRK ortholog expression affects wax ester fermentation in Euglena gracilis . J. Appl. Phycol. 30, 367-373. doi:  10.1007/s10811-017-1235-y
- Kleinberg,  J.  M.  (1999).  Authoritative  sources  in  a  hyperlinked  environment. J.  ACM 46,  604-632.  doi:  10.1145/324133.324140
- Kolde,  R.,  and  Kolde,  M.  R.  (2015).  Package  'pheatmap' .  R  Package  1,  790. Krogh, A., Larsson, B., Von Heijne, G., and Sonnhammer, E. L. (2001). Predicting transmembrane  protein  topology  with  a  hidden  Markov  model:  application to complete genomes. J.  Mol. Biol. 305, 567-580. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315 Krzywinski,  M.,  Schein,  J.,  Birol,  I.,  Connors,  J.,  Gascoyne,  R.,  Horsman,  D., et  al.  (2009).  Circos:  an  information  aesthetic  for  comparative  genomics. Genome  Res. 19,  1639-1645.  doi:  10.1101/gr.092759.109
- Lalman,  J.  A.,  Shewa,  W .  A.,  Gallagher,  J.,  and  Ravella,  S.  (2016).  'Biofuels production  from  renewable  feedstocks'  in Quality  living  through  chemurgy and  green  chemistry .  ed.  P .  C.  K.  Lau  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  193-220. Lee,  T.,  Kim,  H.,  and  Lee,  I.  (2015).  Network-assisted  crop  systems  genetics: network inference and integrative analysis. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 24,  61-70. doi:  10.1016/j.pbi.2015.02.001
- Lehti-Shiu,  M.  D.,  and  Shiu,  S.  H.  (2012).  Diversity,  classification  and  function of  the  plant  protein  kinase  superfamily. Philos.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  B:  Biol.  Sci. 367,  2619-2639.  doi:  10.1098/rstb.2012.0003
- Leinonen, R., Sugawara, H., Shumway, M., and International Nucleotide Sequence Database  Collaboration  (2010).  The  sequence  read  archive. Nucleic  Acids Res. 39,  D19-D21.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkq1019
- Li, Z., Hua, X., Zhong, W ., Yuan, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., et al. (2020). Genomewide  identification  and  expression  profile  analysis  of  WRKY  family  genes in the autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum . Plant Cell Physiol. 61,  616-630. doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcz227
- Li,  M.,  Liang,  Z.,  Zeng,  Y .,  Jing,  Y .,  Wu,  K.,  Liang,  J.,  et  al.  (2016b).  De  novo analysis  of  transcriptome  reveals  genes  associated  with  leaf  abscission  in sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). BMC Genomics 17:195.  doi:  10.1186/ s12864-016-2552-2

- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  Liang,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Liu,  X.,  et  al.  (2016a). Differential  expression  profiles  and  pathways  of  genes  in  sugarcane  leaf  at elongation stage in response to drought stress. Sci. Rep. 6:25698. doi: 10.1038/ srep25698
- Li,  C.,  Nong,  Q.,  Xie,  J.,  Wang,  Z.,  Liang,  Q.,  Solanki,  M.  K.,  et  al.  (2017). Molecular  characterization  and  co-expression  analysis  of  the  SnRK2  gene family  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-12.  doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16152-4
- Li,  J.,  Tang,  W .,  Zhang,  Y .  W .,  Chen,  K.  N.,  Wang,  C.,  Liu,  Y .,  et  al.  (2018). Genome-wide  association  studies  for  five  forage  quality-related  traits  in sorghum ( Sorghum bicolor L.). Front. Plant Sci. 9:1146. doi: 10.3389/ fpls.2018.01146
- Li,  L.  B.,  Zhang,  Y .  R.,  Liu,  K.  C.,  Ni,  Z.  F .,  Fang,  Z.  J.,  Sun,  Q.  X.,  et  al. (2010).  Identification  and  bioinformatics  analysis  of  SnRK2  and  CIPK  family genes in sorghum. Agric. Sci. China 9, 19-30. doi: 10.1016/S1671-2927(09)60063-8
- Ling,  H.,  Huang,  N.,  Wu,  Q.,  Su,  Y.,  Peng,  Q.,  Ahmed,  W .,  et  al.  (2018). Transcriptional insights into the sugarcane-sorghum mosaic virus interaction. Trop.  Plant  Biol. 11,  163-176.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-018-9210-6
- Liu,  J.,  Chen,  N.,  Grant,  J.  N.,  Cheng,  Z.  M.,    Stewart,  C.  N.  Jr.,  and  Hewezi,  T. (2015). Soybean kinome: functional classification and gene expression patterns. J.  Exp.  Bot. 66,  1919-1934.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/eru537
- Mace,  E.  S.,  and  Jordan,  D.  R.  (2011).  Integrating  sorghum  whole  genome sequence  information  with  a  compendium  of  sorghum  QTL  studies  reveals uneven  distribution of QTL  and  of gene-rich regions with significant implications for crop improvement. Theor. Appl. Genet. 123:169. doi: 10.1007/ s00122-011-1575-y
- Magadum,  S.,  Banerjee,  U.,  Murugan,  P .,  Gangapur,  D.,  and  Ravikesavan,  R. (2013). Gene duplication as a major force in evolution. J. Genet. 92, 155-161. doi:  10.1007/s12041-013-0212-8
- Makita,  Y.,  Shimada,  S.,  Kawashima,  M.,  Kondou-Kuriyama,  T.,  Toyoda,  T., and  Matsui,  M.  (2015).  MOROKOSHI:  transcriptome  database  in Sorghum bicolor . Plant  Cell  Physiol. 56:e6.  doi:  10.1093/pcp/pcu187
- Mall,  R.,  Ullah,  E.,  Kunji,  K.,  D' Angelo,  F.,  Bensmail,  H.,  and  Ceccarelli,  M. (2017).  'Differential  community  detection  in  paired  biological  networks, ' in Proceedings  of  the  8th  ACM  International  Conference  on  Bioin-formatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics; August 20-23, 2017; Massachusetts,  MA:  ACM,  330-339.
- Mancini, M. C., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Sforça, D. A., and de Souza, A. P . (2018). 'Targeted sequencing by gene synteny,' a new strategy for polyploid species: sequencing  and  physical  structure  of  a  complex  sugarcane  region. Front. Plant  Sci. 9:397.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2018.00397
- Manning, G., Plowman, G. D., Hunter, T., and Sudarsanam, S. (2002). Evolution of  protein  kinase  signaling  from  yeast  to  man. Trends  Biochem.  Sci. 27, 514-520.  doi:  10.1016/S0968-0004(02)02179-5
- Marquardt,  A.,  Scalia,  G.,  Wathen-Dunn,  K.,  and  Botha,  F.  C.  (2017).  Yellow canopy  syndrome  (YCS)  in  sugarcane  is  associated  with  altered  carbon partitioning in the leaf. Sugar Tech 19, 647-655. doi: 10.1007/s12355-017-0555-1
- Meng,  X.,  and  Zhang,  S.  (2013).  MAPK  cascades  in  plant  disease  resistance signaling. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 51, 245-266. doi: 10.1146/annurevphyto-082712-102314
- Miller, M., Pfeiffer, W ., and Schwartz, T. (2010). 'Creating the cipres science gateway for inference of large phylogenetic trees' in 2010 Gateway Computing Environments Workshop  (GCE) ;  November  14,  2010;  New  Orleans,  LA:  IEEE,  1-8.
- Min, X. J. (2013). ASFinder: a tool for genome-wide identification of alternatively splicing transcripts from EST-derived sequences. Int. J. Bioinforma. Res. Appl. 9,  221-226.  doi:  10.1504/IJBRA.2013.053603
- Min,  X.  J.,  Powell,  B.,  Braessler,  J.,  Meinken,  J.,  Yu,  F.,  and  Sablok,  G.  (2015). Genome-wide cataloging and analysis of alternatively spliced genes in cereal crops. BMC  Genomics 16:721.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-015-1914-5
- Mitra,  K.,  Carvunis,  A.  R.,  Ramesh,  S.  K.,  and  Ideker,  T.  (2013).  Integrative approaches  for  finding  modular  structure  in  biological  networks. Nat.  Rev. Genet. 14,  719-732.  doi:  10.1038/nrg3552
- Moniz, L., Dutt, P .,  Haider,  N.,  and  Stambolic,  V .  (2011).  Nek  family  of  kinases in cell cycle, checkpoint control and cancer. Cell Div. 6:18. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-6-18
- Monreal, J. A., Arias-Baldrich, C., Pérez-Montaño, F., Gandullo, J., Echevarría, C., and García-Mauriño, S. (2013). Factors involved in the rise of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase-kinase activity caused by salinity in sorghum leaves. Planta 237,  1401-1413.  doi:  10.1007/s00425-013-1855-7
- Mutti,  J.  S.,  Bhullar,  R.  K.,  and  Gill,  K.  S.  (2017).  Evolution  of  gene  expression balance  among  homeologs  of  natural  polyploids. G3 7,  1225-1237.  doi: 10.1534/g3.116.038711
- Nagaraju, M., Reddy, P. S., Kumar, S. A., Kumar, A., Rajasheker, G., Rao, D. M., et  al.  (2020).  Genome-wide  identification  and  transcriptional  profiling  of small  heat  shock  protein  gene  family  under  diverse  abiotic  stress  conditions in Sorghum bicolor (L.). Int.  J.  Biol.  Macromol. 142,  822-834.  doi:  10.1016/j. ijbiomac.2019.10.023
- Nhiri,  M.,  Bakrim,  N.,  Pacquit,  V .,  Hachimi-Messouak,  Z.  E.,  Osuna,  L.,  and Vidal, J. (1998). Calcium-dependent and -independent phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinases in sorghum leaves: further evidence for the involvement of the calcium-independent protein kinase in the in situ regulatory phosphorylation  of  c4  phosphoenolpyruvate  carboxylase. Plant  Cell  Physiol. 39,  241-246.  doi:  10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029363
- Niedner,  R.  H.,  Buzko,  O.  V .,  Haste,  N.  M.,  Taylor,  A.,  Gribskov,  M.,  and Taylor,  S.  S.  (2006).  Protein  kinase  resource:  an  integrated  environment  for phosphorylation  research. Proteins 63,  78-86.  doi:  10.1002/prot.20825
- Okura,  V.  K.,  de  Souza,  R.  S.,  de  Siqueira  Tada,  S.  F.,  and  Arruda,  P .  (2016). BAC-pool  sequencing  and  assembly  of  19  Mb  of  the  complex  sugarcane genome. Front.  Plant  Sci. 7:342.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00342
- Pagariya,  M.  C.,  Devarumath,  R.  M.,  and  Kawar,  P .  G.  (2012).  Biochemical characterization and identification of differentially expressed candidate genes in salt stressed sugarcane. Plant Sci. 184, 1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.12.002
- Panje, R. R., and  Babu,  C.  N. (1960). Studies in Saccharum  spontaneum distribution and geographical association of chromosome numbers. Cytologia 25,  152-172.  doi:  10.1508/cytologia.25.152
- Papini-Terzi,  F. S., Rocha,  F.  R., Nicoliello Vêncio,  R.  Z., Oliveira, K. C., de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Vicentini,  R.,  et  al.  (2005).  Transcription  profiling  of signal  transduction-related  genes  in  sugarcane  tissues. DNA Res. 12,  27-38. doi:  10.1093/dnares/12.1.27
- Parra-Londono, S., Fiedler, K., Kavka, M., Samans, B., Wieckhorst, S., Zacharias, A., et  al.  (2018).  Genetic  dissection  of  early-season  cold  tolerance  in  sorghum: genome-wide association studies for seedling emergence and survival under field and controlled environment conditions. Theor. Appl. Genet. 131, 581-595. doi:  10.1007/s00122-017-3021-2
- Patade,  V .  Y.,  Rai,  A.  N.,  and  Suprasanna,  P .  (2011).  Expression  analysis  of sugarcane shaggy-like kinase (SuSK) gene identified through cDNA subtractive hybridization  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  officinarum L.). Protoplasma 248, 613-621.  doi:  10.1007/s00709-010-0207-8
- Paterson,  A.  H.,  Bowers,  J.  E.,  Bruggmann,  R.,  Dubchak,  I.,  Grimwood,  J., Gundlach, H., et al. (2009). The Sorghum bicolor genome and the diversification of  grasses. Nature 457,  551-556.  doi:  10.1038/nature07723
- Patro,  R.,  Duggal,  G.,  and  Kingsford,  C.  (2015).  Salmon:  accurate,  versatile and ultrafast quantification from RNA-seq data using lightweight-alignment. Biorxiv  [preprint].  doi:  10.1101/021592
- Paungfoo-Lonhienne, C., Lonhienne, T. G., Yeoh, Y. K., Donose, B. C., Webb, R. I., Parsons,  J.,  et  al.  (2016).  Crosstalk  between  sugarcane  and  a  plant-growth promoting Burkholderia species. Sci.  Rep. 6:37389.  doi:  10.1038/srep37389
- Pei,  G.  L.,  Jun,  G.,  Wang,  Q.  H.,  and  Kang,  Z.  S.  (2019).  Comparative  analysis of protein kinases and associated domains between Ascomycota and Basidiomycota . J. Integr. Agric. 18, 96-107. doi: 10.1016/S2095-3119(18)62022-2
- Pestenácz, A., and Erdei, L. (1996). Calcium-dependent protein kinase in maize and  sorghum  induced  by  polyethylene  glycol. Physiol.  Plant. 97,  360-364. doi:  10.1034/j.1399-3054.1996.970221.x
- Petersen, T. N., Brunak, S., Von Heijne, G., and Nielsen, H. (2011). SignalP 4.0: discriminating  signal  peptides  from  transmembrane  regions. Nat.  Methods 8,  785-786.  doi:  10.1038/nmeth.1701
- Premachandran,  M.  N.,  Prathima,  P .  T.,  and  Lekshmi,  M.  (2011).  Sugarcane and  polyploidy:  a  review. J.  Sugarcane  Res. 1,  1-15.
- Price,  M.  N.,  Dehal,  P .  S.,  and  Arkin,  A.  P .  (2010).  FastTree  2-approximately maximum-likelihood  trees  for  large  alignments. PLoS  One 5:e9490.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009490
- Raghavan, U. N., Albert, R., and Kumara, S. (2007). Near linear time algorithm to detect community structures in large-scale networks. Phys. Rev. E 76:036106. doi:  10.1103/PhysRevE.76.036106
- R  Core  Team  (2013). R:  A  language  and  environment  for  statistical  computing . Vienna,  Austria:  R  Foundation  for  Statistical  Computing.
- Santa Brigida, A. B., Rojas, C. A., Grativol, C., de Armas, E. M., Entenza, J. O., Thiebaut,  F.,  et  al.  (2016).  Sugarcane  transcriptome  analysis  in  response  to

- infection caused by Acidovorax avenae subsp. avenae. PLoS One 11:e0166473. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0166473
- Schmutz,  J.,  Cannon,  S.  B.,  Schlueter,  J.,  Ma,  J.,  Mitros,  T.,  Nelson,  W .,  et  al. (2010).  Genome  sequence  of  the  palaeopolyploid  soybean. Nature 463, 178-183.  doi:  10.1038/nature08670
- Serin,  E.  A.  R.,  Nijveen,  H.,  Hilhorst,  H.  W .  M.,  and  Ligterink,  W .  (2016). Learning  from  co-expression  networks:  possibilities  and  challenges. Front. Plant  Sci. 7:444.  doi:  10.3389/fpls.2016.00444
- Serna-Saldívar, S. O., Chuck-Hernández, C., Pérez-Carrillo, E., and Heredia-Olea, E. (2012).  'Sorghum  as  a  multifunctional  crop  for  the  production  of  fuel ethanol:  current  status  and  future  trends'  in Bioethanol .  ed.  M.  A.  P .  Lima (Rijeka,  Croatia:  IntechOpen),  51-74.
- Sforça, D. A., Vautrin, S., Cardoso-Silva, C. B., Mancini, M. C., Romero-da Cruz, M. V., and Pereira, G. d. S., et al.  (2019). Gene duplication in  the  sugarcane  genome:  a  case  study  of  allele  interactions  and  evolutionary patterns in two genic regions. Front. Plant Sci. 10:553. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00553
- Shi,  Y .,  Xu,  H.,  Shen,  Q.,  Lin,  J.,  W ang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  et  al.  (2019).  Comparative analysis  of  SUS  gene  family  between Saccharum  officinarum and Saccharum spontaneum . Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  174-185.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09230-6
- Singh,  D.  K.,  Calviño,  M.,  Brauer,  E.  K.,  Fernandez-Pozo,  N.,  Strickler,  S., Yalamanchili,  R.,  et  al.  (2014).  The  tomato  kinome  and  the  tomato  kinase library ORFeome:  novel  resources  for  the  study  of  kinases and  signal transduction  in  tomato  and  solanaceae  species. Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 27,  7-17.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-08-13-0218-TA
- Sperschneider, J., Catanzariti, A.-M., DeBoer, K., Petre, B., Gardiner, D. M., Singh, K. B., et  al.  (2017).  LOCALIZER:  subcellular  localization  prediction  of  both  plant  and effector  proteins  in  the  plant  cell. Sci.  Rep. 7,  1-14.  doi:  10.1038/srep44598
- Srivastava,  S.,  and  Kumar,  P .  (2020).  ' Abiotic  stress  responses  and  tolerance mechanisms  for  sustaining  crop  productivity  in  sugarcane'  in Agronomic crops .  eds.  S.  Naz,  Z.  Fatima,  P .  Iqbal,  A.  Khan,  I.  Zakir,  S.  Noreen  et  al. (Singapore:  Springer),  29-47.
- Su, W., Huang, L., Ling, H., Mao, H., Huang, N., Su, Y., et al. (2020b). Sugarcane calcineurin B-like (CBL) genes play important but versatile roles in regulation of  responses  to  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses. Sci.  Rep. 10,  1-13.  doi:  10.1038/ s41598-019-57058-7
- Su,  W.,  Ren,  Y.,  Wang,  D.,  Su,  Y.,  Feng,  J.,  Zhang,  C.,  et  al.  (2020a).  The alcohol  dehydrogenase  gene  family  in  sugarcane  and  its  involvement  in cold stress regulation. BMC Genomics 21:521. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-06929-9
- Supek, F., Bo š njak,  M., Š kunca, N., and Š muc, T. (2011). REVIGO summarizes and  visualizes  long  lists  of  gene  ontology  terms. PLoS  One 6:e21800.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021800
- Tai,  Y.,  Liu,  C.,  Yu,  S.,  Y ang,  H.,  Sun,  J.,  Guo,  C.,  et  al.  (2018).  Gene  coexpression network analysis reveals coordinated regulation of three characteristic secondary  biosynthetic pathways  in tea plant ( Camellia sinensis ). BMC Genomics 19:616.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-018-4999-9
- Takatani,  S.,  Otani,  K.,  Kanazawa,  M.,  Takahashi,  T.,  and  Motose,  H.  (2015). Structure, function, and evolution of plant NIMA-related kinases: implication for  phosphorylation-dependent  microtubule  regulation. J.  Plant  Res. 128, 875-891.  doi:  10.1007/s10265-015-0751-6
- Tan,  S.  T.,  and  Xue,  H.  W .  (2014).  Casein  kinase  1  regulates  ethylene  synthesis by  phosphorylating  and  promoting  the  turnover  of  ACS5. Cell  Rep. 9, 1692-1702.  doi:  10.1016/j.celrep.2014.10.047
- Teich,  R.,  Grauvogel,  C.,  and  Petersen,  J.  (2007).  Intron  distribution  in  Plantae: 500  million  years  of  stasis  during  land  plant  evolution. Gene 394,  96-104. doi:  10.1016/j.gene.2007.02.011
- Teixeira,  E.  I.,  Fischer,  G.,  van  Velthuizen,  H.,  Walter,  C.,  and  Ewert,  F.  (2013). Global  hot-spots  of  heat  stress  on  agricultural  crops  due  to  climate  change. Agric.  For.  Meteorol. 170,  206-215.  doi:  10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.09.002
- Thirugnanasambandam,  P.  P.,  Hoang,  N.  V .,  Furtado,  A.,  Botha,  F.  C.,  and Henry,  R.  J.  (2017).  Association  of  variation  in  the  sugarcane  transcriptome with  sugar  content. BMC Genomics 18:909.  doi:  10.1186/s12864-017-4302-5
- Tuleski,  T.  R.,  Kimball,  J.,  Do  Amaral,  F.  P .,  Pereira,  T.  P .,  Tadra-Sfeir,  M.  Z., de  Oliveira  Pedrosa,  F.,  et  al.  (2020). Herbaspirillum  rubrisubalbicans as  a phytopathogenic  model  to  study  the  immune  system  of Sorghum  bicolor . Mol.  Plant-Microbe  Interact. 33,  235-246.  doi:  10.1094/MPMI-06-19-0154-R
- UniProt  Consortium  (2007).  The  universal  protein  resource  (UniProt). Nucleic Acids  Res. 36,  D190-D195.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkm895
- Usha Kiranmayee, K. N. S., Hash, C. T., Kavi Kishor, P . B., Ramu, P ., Sivasubramani, S., Sakhale,  S.  A.,  et  al.  (2017).  'Fine  mapping  of  stay-green  QTLs  on  sorghum
- chromosome SBI-10L-an approach from genome to phenome' in InterDrought-V ; February  21-25,  2017;  Hyderabad,  India:  ICRISAT,  235.
- Vaid,  N.,  Pandey,  P .  K.,  and  Tuteja,  N.  (2016).  'Lectin  receptor-like  kinases and their  emerging  role  in  abiotic  stress  tolerance'  in Abiotic  stress  response in  plants .  eds.  N.  Tuteja  and  S.  Gill  (Weinheim,  Germany:  Wiley-VCH Verlag  GmbH  &amp;  Co.),  456.
- van  Dam,  S.,  Vosa,  U.,  van  der  Graaf,  A.,  Franke,  L.,  and  de  Magalhaes,  J.  P . (2018).  Gene  co-expression  analysis  for  functional  classification  and  genedisease  predictions. Brief.  Bioinform. 19,  575-592.  doi:  10.1093/bib/bbw139
- Varberg,  J.  M.,  Coppens,  I.,  Arrizabalaga,  G.,  and  Gaji,  R.  Y.  (2018).  TgTKL1 is  a  unique  plant-like  nuclear  kinase  that  plays  an  essential  role  in  acute toxoplasmosis. MBio 9,  e00301-e00318.  doi:  10.1128/mBio.00301-18
- Varoquaux,  N.,  Cole,  B.,  Gao,  C.,  Pierroz,  G.,  Baker,  C.  R.,  Patel,  D.,  et  al. (2019).  Transcriptomic  analysis  of  field-droughted  sorghum  from  seedling to  maturity  reveals  biotic  and  metabolic  responses. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U.  S.  A. 116,  27124-27132.  doi:  10.1073/pnas.1907500116
- Vettore,  A.  L.,  da  Silva,  F.  R.,  Kemper,  E.  L.,  Souza,  G.  M.,  da  Silva,  A.  M., Ferro,  M.  I.  T.,  et  al.  (2003).  Analysis  and  functional  annotation  of  an expressed  sequence  tag  collection  for  tropical  crop  sugarcane. Genome  Res. 13,  2725-2735.  doi:  10.1101/gr.1532103
- Vicentini,  R.,  de  Maria  Felix,  J.,  Dornelas,  M.  C.,  and  Menossi,  M.  (2009). Characterization  of  a  sugarcane  ( Saccharum spp.)  gene  homolog  to  the brassinosteroid  insensitive1-associated  receptor  kinase  1  that  is  associated to sugar content. Plant Cell Rep. 28, 481-491. doi: 10.1007/s00299-008-0656-0
- Vikal,  Y.,  Kaur,  A.,  Jindal,  J.,  Kaur,  K.,  Pathak,  D.,  Garg,  T.,  et  al.  (2020). Identification  of  genomic  regions  associated  with  shoot  fly  resistance  in maize  and  their  syntenic  relationships  in  the Sorghum genome. PLoS  One 15:e0234335.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0234335
- Villanueva,  R.  A.  M.,  and  Chen,  Z.  J.  (2019).  ggplot2:  elegant  graphics  for data analysis (2nd ed.). Meas. Interdiscip. Res. Pers. 17, 160-167. doi: 10.1080/15366367.2019.1565254
- Voorrips,  R.  E.  (2002).  MapChart:  software  for  the  graphical  presentation  of linkage  maps  and  QTLs. J.  Hered. 93,  77-78.  doi:  10.1093/jhered/93.1.77
- Wang,  H.,  Gu,  L.,  Zhang,  X.,  Liu,  M.,  Jiang,  H.,  Cai,  R.,  et  al.  (2018).  Global transcriptome  and  weighted  gene  co-expression  network  analyses  reveal hybrid-specific modules and candidate genes related to plant height development in  maize. Plant  Mol.  Biol. 98,  187-203.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-018-0763-4
- Wang,  Y .,  Hua,  X.,  Xu,  J.,  Chen,  Z.,  Fan,  T .,  Zeng,  Z.,  et  al.  (2019c).  Comparative genomics  revealed  the  gene  evolution  and  functional  divergence  of  magnesium transporter families in Saccharum . BMC Genomics 20:83. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5437-3
- Wang,  J.,  Li,  Y.,  Zhu,  F.,  Ming,  R.,  and  Chen,  L.  Q.  (2019b).  Genome-wide analysis of nitrate  transporter  (nrt/npf)  family  in  sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Trop. Plant Biol. 12, 133-149. doi: 10.1007/s12042-019-09220-8
- Wang,  J.,  Roe,  B.,  Macmil,  S.,  Yu,  Q.,  Murray,  J.  E.,  Tang,  H.,  et  al.  (2010). Microcollinearity  between  autopolyploid  sugarcane  and  diploid  sorghum genomes. BMC  Genomics 11:261.  doi:  10.1186/1471-2164-11-261
- Wang,  Y.,  Tang,  H.,  DeBarry,  J.  D.,  Tan,  X.,  Li,  J.,  Wang,  X.,  et  al.  (2012). MCScanX: a toolkit for detection  and  evolutionary  analysis  of  gene  synteny and  collinearity. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 40:e49.  doi:  10.1093/nar/gkr1293
- Wang,  H.,  Wang,  Y.,  Xiao,  N.,  Hua,  X.,  Zhang,  M.,  Ming,  R.,  et  al.  (2019a). NAC transcription factors in autopolyploid Saccharum spontaneum :  genomewide  identification,  expression  pattern  and  a  'Dry' orthologous  gene. Res.  Sq. 1-37  [Preprint].  doi:  10.21203/rs.2.17032/v1
- Wang,  T.  J.,  Wang,  X.  H.,  and  Yang,  Q.  H.  (2020).  Comparative  analysis  of drought-responsive transcriptome in different genotype Saccharum spontaneum L. Sugar  Tech 22,  411-427.  doi:  10.1007/s12355-019-00774-1
- Wei,  K.,  Wang,  Y.,  and  Xie,  D.  (2014).  Identification  and  expression  profile analysis  of  the  protein  kinase  gene  superfamily  in  maize  development. Mol. Breed. 33,  155-172.  doi:  10.1007/s11032-013-9941-x
- Xiong,  J.,  Cui,  X.,  Y uan,  X.,  Y u,  X.,  Sun,  J.,  and  Gong,  Q.  (2016).  The  hippo/STE20 homolog SIK1 interacts with MOB1 to regulate cell proliferation and cell expansion in Arabidopsis . J.  Exp.  Bot. 67,  1461-1475.  doi:  10.1093/jxb/erv538
- Xu,  G.,  Guo,  C.,  Shan,  H.,  and  Kong,  H.  (2012).  Divergence  of  duplicate  genes in  exon-intron  structure. Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A. 109,  1187-1192. doi:  10.1073/pnas.1109047109
- Xu,  S., Wang,  J., Shang,  H.,  Huang,  Y.,  Yao,  W .,  Chen,  B.,  et al.  (2018). Transcriptomic characterization and potential marker development of contrasting sugarcane cultivars. Sci. Rep. 8, 1-11. doi: 10.1038/ s41598-018-19832-x

- Yan,  J.,  Li,  G.,  Guo,  X.,  Li,  Y .,  and  Cao,  X.  (2018).  Genome-wide  classification, evolutionary analysis and gene expression patterns of the kinome in Gossypium . PLoS  One 13:e0197392.  doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0197392
- Yan, J., Su, P ., Wei, Z., Nevo, E., and Kong, L. (2017). Genome-wide identification, classification,  evolutionary  analysis  and  gene  expression  patterns  of  the protein  kinase  gene  family  in  wheat  and Aegilops  tauschii . Plant  Mol.  Biol. 95,  227-242.  doi:  10.1007/s11103-017-0637-1
- Yu,  C.  S.,  Chen,  Y.  C.,  Lu,  C.  H.,  and  Hwang,  J.  K.  (2006).  Prediction  of protein subcellular localization. Proteins 64, 643-651. doi: 10.1002/prot.21018
- Yu,  G.,  Smith,  D.  K.,  Zhu,  H.,  Guan,  Y.,  and  Lam,  T.  T.  Y.  (2017).  ggtree:  an R  package  for  visualization  and  annotation  of  phylogenetic  trees  with  their covariates  and  other  associated  data. Methods  Ecol.  Evol. 8,  28-36.  doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.12628
- Zhang,  Z.,  Li,  J.,  Zhao,  X.  Q.,  Wang,  J.,  Wong,  G.  K.  S.,  and  Yu,  J.  (2006). KaKs_calculator: calculating Ka and Ks through model selection and model averaging. Genom. Proteom. Bioinform. 4, 259-263. doi: 10.1016/ S1672-0229(07)60007-2
- Zhang,  W.,  Lin,  J.,  Dong,  F.,  Ma,  Q.,  Wu,  S.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2019b).  Genomic and  allelic  analyses  of  laccase  genes  in  sugarcane  ( Saccharum  spontaneum L.). Trop.  Plant  Biol. 12,  219-229.  doi:  10.1007/s12042-019-09239-x
- Zhang,  C.,  Wang,  J.,  Tao,  H.,  Dang,  X.,  Wang,  Y.,  Chen,  M.,  et  al.  (2015). FvBck1, a component of cell wall integrity MAP kinase pathway, is required for  virulence  and  oxidative  stress  response  in  sugarcane  Pokkah  Boeng pathogen. Front.  Microbiol. 6:1096.  doi:  10.3389/fmicb.2015.01096
- Zhang,  H.,  and  Yin,  T.  (2020).  Analysis  of  topology  properties  in  different tissues of poplar based on gene co-expression networks. Tree Genet. Genomes 16:6.  doi:  10.1007/s11295-019-1400-3
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Li,  L.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Chen,  Y.,  et  al.  (2019a). Recent  polyploidization  events  in  three Saccharum founding  species. Plant Biotechnol.  J. 17,  264-274.  doi:  10.1111/pbi.12962
- Zhang,  J.,  Zhang,  X.,  Tang,  H.,  Zhang,  Q.,  Hua,  X.,  Ma,  X.,  et  al.  (2018). Allele-defined genome of the autopolyploid sugarcane Saccharum spontaneum L. Nat.  Genet. 50,  1565-1573.  doi:  10.1038/s41588-018-0237-2
- Zhao,  W.,  Langfelder,  P .,  Fuller,  T.,  Dong,  J.,  Li,  A.,  and  Hovarth,  S.  (2010). Weighted  gene  coexpression  network  analysis:  state  of  the  art. J.  Biopharm. Stat. 20,  281-300.  doi:  10.1080/10543400903572753
- Zhu,  K.,  Liu,  H.,  Chen,  X.,  Cheng,  Q.,  and  Cheng,  Z.  M.  M.  (2018a).  The kinome  of  pineapple:  catalog  and  insights  into  functions  in  crassulacean acid metabolism plants. BMC Plant Biol. 18:199. doi: 10.1186/s12870-018-1389-z
- Zhu,  K.,  Wang,  X.,  Liu,  J.,  Tang,  J.,  Cheng,  Q.,  Chen,  J.  G.,  et  al.  (2018b). The  grapevine  kinome:  annotation,  classification  and  expression  patterns  in developmental  processes  and  stress  responses. Hortic.  Res. 5,  1-16.  doi: 10.1038/s41438-018-0027-0
- Zou,  X.,  Liu,  A.,  Zhang,  Z.,  Ge,  Q.,  Fan,  S.,  Gong,  W .,  et  al.  (2019).  Coexpression  network  analysis  and  hub  gene  selection  for  high-quality  fiber in  upland  cotton  ( Gossypium  hirsutum )  using  RNA  sequencing  analysis. Gene 10:119.  doi:  10.3390/genes10020119
- Zulawski, M., and Schulze, W. X. (2015). 'The plant kinome' in Plant Phosphoproteomics .  ed.  W .  Schulze  (New  Y ork,  NY:  Springer),  1-23.
- Zulawski,  M.,  Schulze,  G.,  Braginets,  R.,  Hartmann,  S.,  and  Schulze,  W .  X. (2014).  The Arabidopsis kinome:  phylogeny  and  evolutionary  insights  into functional diversification. BMC Genomics 15:548. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-548

Conflict  of  Interest: The  authors  declare  that  the  research  was  conducted  in the  absence  of  any  commercial  or  financial  relationships  that  could  be  construed as  a  potential  conflict  of  interest.

Copyright  ©  2021 Aono,  Pimenta,  Garcia,  Correr,  Hosaka,  Carrasco,  Cardoso-Silva, Mancini,  Sforça,  dos  Santos,  Nagai,  Pinto,  Landell,  Carneiro,  Balsalobre,  Quiles, Pereira,  Rodrigues  Alves  Margarido  and  de  Souza.  This  is  an  open-access  article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  in  other  forums  is  permitted,  provided  the original  author(s)  and  the  copyright  owner(s)  are  credited  and  that  the  original publication  in  this  journal  is  cited,  in  accordance  with  accepted  academic  practice. No  use,  distribution  or  reproduction  is  permitted  which  does  not  comply  with these  terms.
DATA AVAILABILITY
## DATA  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT

The  datasets  presented  in  this  study  can  be  found  in  online repositories. The names of the repositories and accession numbers can be found at: National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, PRJEB38368,  PRJNA681593,  PRJEB41560  and  PRJEB40481.
| Sugarcane      | Sugarcane         | Sugarcane            |
|----------------|-------------------|----------------------|
| Species        | Genotype          | Tissue               |
| S. officinarum | Badila De Java    | Culms                |
| S. officinarum | Criolla Rayada    | Leaves               |
| S. officinarum | White Transparent | Leaves               |
| S. robustum    | IJ76-318          | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-58           | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | IN84-88           | Leaves               |
| S. spontaneum  | Krakatau          | Culms, leaves        |
| S. spontaneum  | SES205A           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | F36-819           | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | IACSP93-3046      | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | R570              | Culms                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB72454           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855113          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855156          | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB855536          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB867515          | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | RB92579           | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP79-1011         | Roots                |
| Saccharum sp.  | SP80-3280         | Culms, leaves, roots |
| Saccharum sp.  | TUC71-7           | Leaves               |
| Saccharum sp.  | US85-1008         | Leaves               |

| Species         | Genotype   | Tissue                                                                       |
|-----------------|------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Pollen, microspore, roots, ligule epidermial tissue, blade epidermial tissue |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Roots, shoots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX623     | Seeds, spikelets, top internodes                                             |
| Sorghum bicolor | BTX642     | Leaves, roots                                                                |
| Sorghum bicolor | R.07020    | Internodes 1-4                                                               |
| Sorghum bicolor | RTX430     | Leaves, roots                                                                |

| Aco            | Aquilegia coerulea                                                                                                           |
|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AGC            | Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (cAPK), cGMP-dependent protein kinase, and lipid signaling kinase families               |
| Aly            | Arabidopsis lyrata                                                                                                           |
| Ath            | Arabidopsis thaliana                                                                                                         |
| B-lectin       | D-mannose-binding lectin                                                                                                     |
| Bdi            | Brachypodium distachyon                                                                                                      |
| CAMK           | Calcium- and calmodulin-regulated kinase                                                                                     |
| Ccl            | Citrus clementina                                                                                                            |
| CDS            | DNA coding sequence                                                                                                          |
| CK1            | Casein kinase 1                                                                                                              |
| CMGC           | Cyclin-dependent kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, glycogen synthase kinase, and cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinase |
| Cpa            | Carica papaya                                                                                                                |
| Cre            | Chlamydomonas reinhardtii                                                                                                    |
| Csa            | Cucumis sativus                                                                                                              |
| Csi            | Citrus sinensis                                                                                                              |
| DUF26          | Domain of Unknown Function 26                                                                                                |
| Egr            | Eucalyptus grandis                                                                                                           |
| ER             | Endoplasmic reticulum                                                                                                        |
| GM             | Gene model                                                                                                                   |
| Gma            | Glycine max                                                                                                                  |
| GO             | Gene Ontology                                                                                                                |
| GUB            | Galacturonan-binding                                                                                                         |
| HMM            | Hidden Markov model                                                                                                          |
| IRE1           | Inositol-requiring kinase 1                                                                                                  |
| Ka             | Nonsynonymous substitution rates                                                                                             |
| Ks             | Synonymous substitution rates                                                                                                |
| LRR            | Leucine-rich repeat                                                                                                          |
| LRRNT          | Leucine-rich repeat N-terminal domain                                                                                        |
| Mes            | Manihot esculenta                                                                                                            |
| Mgu            | Mimulus guttatus                                                                                                             |
| Mtr            | Medicago truncatula                                                                                                          |
| MW             | Molecular weight                                                                                                             |
| MYA            | Million years ago                                                                                                            |
| Osa            | Oryza sativa kinase                                                                                                          |
| PEK            | Pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha                                                                               |
| PK             | Protein kinase                                                                                                               |
| pI             | Isoelectric point                                                                                                            |
| Ppa            | Physcomitrella patens                                                                                                        |
| Ppe Ptr        | Prunus persica Populus trichocarpa                                                                                           |
| Rco            | Ricinus communis                                                                                                             |
| RLK            | Receptor-like kinase                                                                                                         |
| S-locus-glycop |                                                                                                                              |
|                | S-locus glycoprotein                                                                                                         |
| Sit            | Setaria italica                                                                                                              |
| Smo            | Selaginella moellendorffii                                                                                                   |
|                | Saccharum spontaneum                                                                                                         |
| Ssp            |                                                                                                                              |
| STE TKL        | Serine/threonine kinase Tyrosine kinase-like kinase                                                                          |
| TPM            | Transcripts per million                                                                                                      |
| Vca            | Volvox carteri                                                                                                               |
| Vvi            | Vitis vinifera                                                                                                               |
| WAK WGD        | Wall-associated receptor kinase Whole-genome duplication                                                                     |
| Zma            | Zea mays                                                                                                                     |

        ==== ARTICLE TEXT END ====

        CRITICAL REMINDERS:
        - Extract ONLY information present in the article text above
        - DO NOT use external knowledge or make assumptions
        - If information is missing, use null and explain in notes
        - Include evidence_text for medium/low confidence entries
        - ALWAYS output your reasoning process first (=== REASONING PROCESS === section), then the JSON
        - The reasoning section helps ensure accuracy and allows validation of your extraction logic
        - For tables: Process systematically row-by-row, don't skip entries
        - For ambiguous cases: State your interpretation in reasoning, then reflect uncertainty in confidence level
        - Validate JSON format: Ensure all braces, brackets, and commas are correct
        - NO markdown code blocks (no ```json), NO additional commentary - just reasoning section followed by raw JSON

        OUTPUT STRUCTURE:
        === REASONING PROCESS ===
        [Your step-by-step analysis here]
        === END REASONING ===

        [Raw JSON output here - no code blocks, no markdown]

        Required JSON Output Format:
        {
            "entries": [
                {
                    "accession": "string or null",
                    "accession_type": "BioProject | SRA | BioSample | GEO | GenBank | Other | null",
                    "organism": "string (scientific name)",
                    "genotype": "string (cultivar/variety/strain)",
                    "confidence": "high | medium | low",
                    "source_location": "main text | supplementary file | data availability statement | methods appendix | not found",
                    "evidence_text": "string or null (required for medium/low confidence)"
                }
            ],
            "notes": "string (observations, uncertainties, or explanations)"
        }
2025-10-28 17:05:02,438 - INFO - HTTP Request: POST http://127.0.0.1:11434/api/generate "HTTP/1.1 200 OK"
2025-10-28 17:05:02,444 - INFO - Response class: GenerateResponse
 Response.response class: str
2025-10-28 17:05:02,444 - INFO - LLM response received.

2025-10-28 17:05:02,444 - INFO - {"type": "function", "name": "extract_accessions", "parameters": {"text": "National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, PRJEB38368,  PRJNA681593,  PRJEB41560  and  PRJEB40481"}}
Hello from llm_finder.py!
